
vestíbulo y en el campamento.”

				THE LADY: “A lady is a lady in the

vestibule as well as the campsite.”



				 				 				 				 				 				Things changed after our encounter with the chupacabras. Suddenly, my sisters and I became more focused. I used the water from Chencho’s abandoned canteen to clean Pita’s wound. I could see by the light of the campfire that her leg was obviously getting infected. The chupacabras’s mordida had left three ugly lacerations two inches above her ankle, on the outside of her leg, so both her ankle and calf were swollen to twice their normal size. I did my best to keep it clean by wrapping it in one of Pita’s short-sleeved shirts.

				Velia, Delia, and Juanita were too worried to sit around watching me treat Pita’s wounds. Instead, they scurried around like little sugar ants, busy hormiguitas, gathering the materials to create a sturdy device in which to carry our wounded sister, because her leg hurt so much that she couldn’t walk.

				I was surprised at how helpful and cooperative everyone was with each other. Even the twins were being polite. I didn’t mention how nice it was to see them working together or praise them in any way, for fear of breaking the spell. But I was proud of them nonetheless.

				By sunrise, the girls had built a stretcher by tying old pieces of wood and broken branches with torn strips of cloth from a pair of Juanita’s old shorts. It wasn’t pretty, but it was strong enough to hold Pita.

				Velia and Delia picked up the stretcher from the front, while Juanita and I took the back. With Pita gratefully resting on the makeshift gurney, we continued our journey toward Hacienda Dorada.

				We traveled slowly, stopping often to rest because our arms were not used to carrying so much weight for so long. By the middle of the afternoon, we stopped by an ojito, a spring bubbling out of a rock wall, and drank water straight out of the spouting hole. Our sleep-deprived night could be seen in the circles under our eyes, and our stomachs rumbled with hunger, but we felt for the first time that our ordeal might soon be over.

				“It won’t be far,” I said as I stood rubbing the pain out of my wrists.

				“How much longer, do you think?” Juanita asked, looking at the map. “Because it looks like we should be right on it.”

				“Just over that big hill.” I checked on Pita’s leg. Carefully, I peeled back the dressing and saw that, although the wound wasn’t oozing, her entire calf was purple now. Pita seemed to be in too much pain to talk, because she wasn’t complaining anymore. Instead, she drifted in and out of sleep for the last leg of our trip. Her lethargy worried me, so I took her temperature with a thermometer in the twin’s toolkit.

				I was so afraid of Pita losing her leg, I considered using La Llorona’s gift. I was sure its magical properties could do the job well, but I also worried about misusing the amulet’s last gift when I knew that in less than an hour, in the time it would take to walk the last few miles of our journey, Abuelita would be able to take care of her.

				Our grandmother was, after all, a curandera. She knew how to use natural herbs to cure almost anything. The memory of her treating a farmer’s ulcerated arm the last time we visited her was still fresh in my mind, so I decided to wait and see what she could do for Pita’s leg. The ear pendant would still be there if I needed to use it later.

				“She’s running a fever,” I said. Juanita shook her head in dismay. Velia and Delia cursed under their breaths and knelt beside Pita. Delia touched her face and forehead and asked her if she wanted some of the water they’d been saving just for her.

				“No,” Pita whispered weakly. “I’ll be all right. Let’s just keep going.”

				“You heard her. Let’s go,” I said. Pita closed her eyes to the sun and rolled her head to the side as if she didn’t care what we did.

				We lifted the stretcher and started walking again. Up the hill we went, on and on, until our arms and legs hurt so much that we kept losing our footing. We walked so far and for so long, we almost dropped Pita a couple of times before we reached the crest of the cerro.

				 I knew it the minute I saw it from the top of the hill. The girls didn’t recognize Hacienda Dorada, but I did. “Pita, we’re here. You’re going to be okay, mamita,” I said as we stood staring down at our destination.

				Pita lifted her head long enough to look down the cerro. “Oh, thank God,” she whispered before she lay back down and closed her eyes again.

				Exhilarated by the sight of our paternal grandmother’s home, we walked hurriedly down the hill toward the pink stucco building within the corral-like fence, being careful not to jostle Pita too much in the stretcher. The lilac jacaranda tree by the gate, leaning backward over the fence as if the wind had made it laugh, was exactly as I remembered it. The abundant crepe myrtles and pink bougainvilleas that dotted the courtyard were also as beautiful and lively as I recalled.

				“Look at all those flowers,” Pita said, looking at Hacienda Dorada as if she’d never seen anything more exquisite in her life. She probably didn’t remember playing there among the flowers the last time Papá brought us to see his mother so long ago.

				“Forget the flowers,” Velia whispered. “Have you ever seen so many mariposas?”

				As we got close enough to see the multicolored array of butterflies flittering in the courtyard of our grandmother’s house, Juanita answered, “Not so many different kinds in one place.” The girls kept marveling at the sight as we neared the gate.

				“Forget the butterflies,” I said, interrupting their rapture. “Let’s find Abuelita. Pita’s leg isn’t going to cure itself. How are you doing?” I looked down at Pita’s face as we moved along. She was so flushed, I just knew she was getting worse.

				“Fine,” Pita closed her eyes and sighed. She was trying to be brave, but I could tell she was still in pain. “I’ll be all right once we get inside.”

				“Hold on,” I said. Velia and Delia banged on the gate with a stick and called out for help.

				It didn’t take long for someone to notice us. Looking up from their chores, two men dropped their garden tools and hurried over to open the gate for us.

				“What is the matter? ¿Qué pasó?” they asked.

				“We are here to see Remedios Garza,” I said, still holding on to the stretcher. “We’re her granddaughters.”

				“From los Estados Unidos?” the first man asked. He took the front of the stretcher and the other man took the back.

				“Yes, from the United States,” I confirmed as I relinquished my end of the stretcher gratefully.

				The younger of the two men hoisted the stretcher and began walking backward toward the main house. “Oh, what a great surprise,” he exclaimed. “Your abuela will be very happy to see you, but she will not be happy that one of you is hurt.”

				The older man walked forward holding his end of the stretcher before him. “This way. Follow us, please.”

				Abuelita Remedios looked exactly as I remembered her. Her white-streaked hair was perfectly coiffed into a bun, and her blue eyes were sharp and fierce, centered over a long aquiline nose. Yet her mouth was wide and generous as she turned around and smiled at us.

				“Dios Santísimo,” Abuela Remedios crossed herself and kissed her thumb before she reached out for us, welcoming us. “Is that really you? ¿Mis niñas? ¿Mis nietecitas?” she asked happily.

				“It is us,” I said, stepping forward to receive a hug. “We’re all grown up now, Abuelita.”

				“Sí. I would say so! Mira, pero what has happened to you?” Abuela Remedios asked as she took hold of Pita’s head in her hands and looked at her flushed face. “Arturo! Roberto! Take her inside, to the sala rosada. Quickly now! She has a fever!”

				The two men, who looked too alike not to be related, hurried ahead of us. “Come in, come in,” Abuelita said as we entered the house behind the men and followed them into a pink receiving room. “Have a seat. You look like the zopilotes, those nasty good-for-nothing vultures, beat you up and plucked every feather off your pretty wings.”

				Once inside, Arturo, the younger man, picked up Pita’s limp body and transferred her over onto a cushioned wooden bench. Abuelita Remedios put one arm around me and another one around Juanita and gave all of us a group hug.

				“We’re okay,” I told Abuelita. “It’s Pita we’re worried about.”

				“What happened to her?” she asked, inspecting Pita’s leg as our sister lay with her eyes closed on the rustic bench.

				“Something bit her,” I said, not sure how much to disclose — not because I didn’t trust Abuelita, but because I wasn’t sure she’d believe me.

				Abuelita’s eyebrows furrowed with worry. “But this is not an ordinary dog bite.” She knelt at Pita’s leg to examine it closely.

				“It wasn’t a dog,” I said, fighting the urge to go ahead and tell her what really happened. Having Abuelita think I was crazy would only complicate matters. “But it’s infected,” I continued, trying to provide a little more information without sounding like a lunatic.

				“I can see that,” Abuelita Remedios whispered. She turned Pita’s leg sideways to get a better look.

				Pita took in a sharp breath at Abuelita’s touch. It looked like her leg was painful to move at this point. “It happened late last night,” she said, wincing.

				“It’s not a snake bite either, is it, Roberto?” Abuelita declared, as she showed Pita’s ankle to the older of the two men. “See here? Three puncture wounds.”

				Roberto crossed himself, horrified at the sight of Pita’s leg. “¡El chupacabras!” Looking back at us, he asked, “Did you see the thing that bit her?”

				“Yes,” I said. My voice cracked as I tried my best not to cry, because for the first time on the trip I was worried about one of us not making it back to Mamá.

				“It was the chupacabras,” Velia exclaimed. “But he didn’t get away with it. We took care of him.”

				“What do you mean?” Arturo asked, his dark brown eyes penetrating as he looked at me for answers. “You saw it?”

				“Saw it? We did more than that. We blinded him. He won’t be attacking anyone anymore,” Delia said, sounding quite proud of herself.

				“You did?” Roberto asked. “That’s incredible.”

				“Odilia did it,” Juanita said, looking at me with an appreciative gleam in her eyes. “She’s fearless.” She would have proceeded to recount the whole thing if I hadn’t interrupted.

				“Well, at least he’s not likely to hurt anyone else. Not without his other eye,” I said, trying to play the whole thing down a bit. Not only did I not like being the center of attention — that’s a job better suited for the twins — but I also felt bad for inflicting pain on Chencho, even though I had been suspicious of him. But more importantly, I still worried about what he did to Pita. We didn’t have time for stories right now.

				“Unfortunately, the damage has already been done,” Abuelita said as she checked Pita’s pulse. “We have to treat her immediately. Arturo, get me my bulto, my medicine bag. It’s in the hallway, in the broom closet, up high. Hurry! We don’t have much time.” Abuelita Remedios waved to the younger man, who ran out of the room in a fright.

				“You mean she’s going to turn into one of those demons?” Velia asked, her voice high like a scared little girl.

				“No, of course not,” Abuelita said, turning around and patting Velia’s hands to reassure her. “That’s not possible, not when you’re dealing with the chupacabras. His bite is very dangerous, but he’s not contagious. What I mean is that his saliva is tainted. It has contaminated her blood. She’s fighting the infection, but she’s so young, it’s hard to tell how much damage it has done.”

				“I knew it,” Delia said, tearing up at the terrible thought. “I knew it. We should have killed that rotten little mongrel.”

				I don’t know what I’d envisioned, but Abuelita Remedios’s medicine bag was nothing like what I remembered. The “bulto” was just that, a bulky remnant of thick, white cloth tied together at the top in a vagabond’s knot. And when she opened it, I wasn’t as surprised as I was curious. Inside, she had all manner of herbs, seeds, sprigs, and plant roots. The contents of Abuelita’s bulto looked like it may have belonged to El Niño Fidencio, the famous curandero of olden times, and I watched in awe as she sorted the ingredients for Pita’s treatment.

				“Shouldn’t we send for a doctor?” Juanita asked, eyeing the medicine bag suspiciously. “She needs antibiotics.”

				“What do you think these are?” Abuelita Remedios took her bulto to the coffee table and started to grind dried leaves and sprigs together in a miniature white mortar with a tiny white pestle.

				“Herbs.” I explained to Juanita. “Like the ones pharmaceutical companies use to make medicines in the United States.”

				“Sí,” Abuelita Remedios said. “But regular medicines are useless when it comes to treating a wound like this. A bite from the chupacabras is ten times deadlier than any viper’s. These, however, are the finest herbs in all of Mexico. People from all over the country come to my garden to harvest these medicines.” Abuelita picked up a desiccated brown sprig between her fingertips. “This one is for the pain. This one is an anti-inflammatory, and this” — she said proudly, as she picked up a tiny blue glass bottle and shook it in my direction — “this is stronger than any anti-venom in the world. It is my secret potion, the power and the glory of potions, made from the blood of the lamb and agua bendita, sacred water from Texcoco Lake.”

				We watched in awe as Abuelita Remedios lanced, compressed, and flushed Pita’s wounds one at a time before applying her concoction liberally to each laceration. Because she was heavily sedated, Pita slept through the lancing and compressing and didn’t come back around until Abuelita Remedios was done wrapping her leg with a pale thin gauze.

				“Am I going to die?” Pita asked when she regained consciousness.

				I caressed her forehead and pushed her hair out of her face. “No. Of course not. You’re going to be just fine. You just need to rest. Okay, mamita?”

				“That is a fact,” Abuelita Remedios said, feeling Pita’s forehead and pinching her cheek affectionately. “You and your sisters all need to rest. You’ll stay here with me for as long it takes you to get your strength back. It will give us an opportunity to get to know each other again. I’ll call your mother and let her know you’re okay. She will be glad to hear from us.”

				“We don’t have a phone. I mean, it’s been disconnected, so there’s no way to reach her,” I whispered. I hated myself for lying to my own grandmother, but I silently promised the virgen I would come clean soon. I just had to sit down with Abuelita tomorrow and explain why we couldn’t afford to call the café and let Mamá know where we were yet. If Mamá tried to leave the country to come get us, she could get in trouble with the police, and that’s something I couldn’t live with. I hoped Abuelita would understand.

				“Well, that’s the least of our worries. We’ll find a way to get in touch with her when the time comes.” Abuelita waved her hand as if to dismiss the issue. “For now, I think we need to let your sister rest. Come. Let us go to the kitchen and get you all fed. You look like scarecrows who’ve lost their stuffing.”

				Because we hadn’t eaten since the night before, sharing the cheese and loaf of bread with the chupacabras, we ate everything Abuelita Remedios put in front of us that afternoon. First, she brought out plates of spicy tamales and borracho beans, and when that was gone, she brought down a fruit basket. There were ripe, sweet figs and fleshy pears and a fragrant papaya that Abuelita sliced through and splayed out for us on a serving tray. We drank the most delectable agua de tamarindo, sweet-tart juice made from tamarind, and ate and ate and ate.

				After dinner, Arturo pulled bucket after bucket of water out of the well in the courtyard to fill up the enormous bathing trough in the laundry room. While we bathed, Abuelita looked in on Pita and informed us that her fever was going down.

				After our baths, we sat, all five of us, on an enormous carpet around Abuelita’s bed telling her the tales of our adventures along the bank of the Rio Grande. She laughed at our jokes and teased us when we couldn’t comb through the knots in our ratted hair. But she was kind and generous and braided our hair for us before we went to bed.

				Eating, sleeping, bathing, laughing, talking, helping, and tending to Pita’s every need, that is how we spent the next few days at Abuelita’s house. In the mornings, Juanita and the twins helped Abuelita with the feeding of the animals. But when they went back in the house to take care of the household chores, I helped Abuelita in the herb garden. We watered the delicate plants and pulled weeds and Abuelita named each plant as we went along, telling me what they were good for: yerbabuena for a belly ache, manzanilla to soothe the nerves, and milenrama to heal wounds or stop hemorrhages. She described different features of each plant and explained the best way to remember them.

				In the afternoons, however, we sat in the courtyard while Pita lay out in the sun on a wrought-iron bench, recuperating among the myriad of colorful mariposas that abounded in that heavenly place.

				 By the end of the week, Pita got up and hobbled about the courtyard of Hacienda Dorada, clapping and laughing at the girls as they chased mariposas around the wide, robust bougainvilleas. Abuelita Remedios walked over and took a good look at Pita’s sparkly eyes and pink cheeks. She touched her forehead and a small smile made her thin lips curl up at the edges. “Bueno,” she said. “I think you’re well enough to go home now. Girls, we leave at dawn.”

				As we sat cross-legged on the rectangular carpet in her bedroom the evening of the fifth day, Abuelita proclaimed, “It’s time you got back to your Mamá, but before you do, we have to talk.”

				“Yes!” Juanita exclaimed. “There’s so much more we want to know, so much you haven’t told us yet.”

				“Like what?” Abuelita asked, pinning Juanita’s long thick braid to the back of her head in a circular pattern.

				Pita looked at Abuelita with adoration. “What was Papá like when he was our age?”

				Her question startled me. We’d been so focused on our little sister’s recovery that we hadn’t given Papá a single thought since our arrival. The realization baffled me, since that had been primary on our minds when we left — the be-all and end-all of our journey, the reason for leaving Mamá’s side.

				“Your father hasn’t changed,” Abuelita Remedios said, pausing to look at us with much sadness. “As a child, he was exactly as he is today.”

				A long moment of silence followed. “We haven’t seen him in a while,” I said. “He’s been gone for a long time.”

				“I know,” Abuelita whispered. “He left about this time last year.”

				As far as I could tell, none of us had divulged that bit of information yet. “How do you know that?” I asked in surprise. “Who told you?”

				“He did,” Abuelita Remedios whispered, her brows furrowed worriedly over her eyes. “He told me he’d left the last time I saw him. I urged him to reconsider, but he said it was already done.”

				My chest suddenly felt tight and constricted. I pressed my hand against it and let out a long-held deep breath. “So he’s been here?” I asked, choking back the tears of relief and something else, something deeply rooted, something wounded and mad. “Well, at least we know he’s alive. We haven’t heard from him in so long, I was beginning to wonder.”

				“You were?” Juanita asked. “You never told me that.”

				I covered my face for a moment to stop the tears from coming, and when I uncovered it, Abuelita was leaning forward, looking into my eyes. She took my hands, kissed my knuckles, and then squeezed my fingers tightly between hers. “Oh yes. He’s alive,” she said, nodding. “At least he was a few months ago.”

				“A few months ago?” I asked, the anger within me growing as it devoured the hurt and the pain the knowledge was causing.

				“Did he tell you why he left?” Juanita asked, her eyes narrowing intently.

				“He did,” Abuelita said. “But that is not for me to discuss. That is for your parents to explain.”

				“But why?” Pita whined. “Why can’t you tell us? We told you everything. We even told you about the dead man’s body and about La Llorona and the nagual. Why can’t you tell us what’s going on with Papá?” Pita started to sob softly.

				“Ay, mi niña. Please don’t cry,” Abuelita Remedios said, wiping a runaway tear off Pita’s cheek with her right thumb. “Listen. I’m not trying to keep secrets from you, and I’m glad you’ve been so honest with me. I needed to know those things. So I am going to tell you one thing. Your Papá left because he is selfish. It’s our fault really, mine and your abuelito Reynaldo’s, God rest his soul. You see, we spoiled him. We made him think that because he was so talented, because he could sing so well, he was more important than everyone else in the world, and for that, I am deeply sorry.”

				“You spoiled him?” Juanita asked, confused.

				“And yet, he never spoiled us,” Velia said.

				Juanita reached over and smacked Velia’s arm. “Yes, he did. He spoiled us all the time.”

				“When?” Delia asked indignantly.

				“I don’t remember that,” Velia agreed.

				“Spoken like a couple of spoiled brats,” Juanita said, giving them the evil eye. “When we were younger, he wasn’t performing, so he had a regular job in Houston and used to come home on weekends with his arms loaded with presents. It was like Christmas in April, or July, or August, or whatever month it happened to be. He always brought us presents when he came home.”

				“I remember!” Delia exclaimed. “He brought us dolls and board games, and those little plastic jewelry sets with the giant rings and matching tiaras. Don’t you remember, Velia? He even brought you a special present once because you saw a game on TV and called him begging for a basketball.”

				“Oh yeah, the basketball incident. You all hated me for that,” Velia said, twisting her face with the effort of recollection.

				“We had so many toys, we didn’t even play with most of them,” Juanita said, remembering how good life used to be before Papá stopped coming home regularly and only showed up every now and then.

				“And now we have to make our own bracelets out of used aluminum cans. Way to go Papá!” Velia drew her knees up to her chin and stared off into space, pouting.

				“I like our bracelets better. Besides, I’m not so sure Papá was spoiling us. I think he felt guilty, for being gone so much,” I said. The picture of Mamá crying on the television because of us came to my mind, and my throat tightened. “And there are worse things than not having him around anymore.”

				“Like not knowing where your daughters are?” Abuelita asked as if she’d read my mind. “Or if you’ll ever see them again?”

				Velia sat up on her knees to face us. “I’m sorry, but am I the only one who thinks maybe Mamá deserves it a little? I mean, think about it. After Papá left us, Mamá literally stopped taking care of us. She didn’t listen to us anymore. She didn’t even know where we were half the time.”

				“Velia!” I exclaimed. “Nobody deserves this.” I thought of what terrible daughters we’d been, how the cries of the lechuzas were not far off. We’d been bad too, and Mamá still loved us.

				“I think Velia has a point.” Delia intervened in a strangled voice. “The truth is Mamá was just as bad as Papá, muy descuidada, very neglectful of us.”

				“That’s not fair!” Abuelita Remedios exclaimed. “I know your Mamá. She’s a decent woman, with good morals and values. She’s always been a good mother and wife. I want you to understand one thing. Your mother didn’t do anything wrong. Your father left because he’s a louse, a good-for-nothing who cares more about himself than his own wife and daughters. He’s up to no good. Otherwise, why would he be trying to divorce your mamá?”

				“Divorce Mamá?” Juanita asked, her eyes wide with sudden understanding.

				I left the floor and sat up on the bed next to Abuelita. “Did he tell you why?” I asked turning my full attention to her.

				Abuelita looked disgusted. “He wants to reinvent himself! He says he wants a new life. It’s a common story. You hear it all the time around these parts: men go work up North, and after a while, they forget their families because they’ve started a new life en los Estados Unidos. But I never thought my own son would do this. Not to your mamá. Not to Rosalinda.”

				“He can’t do that,” Pita said, choking on her words as she wiped the tears from her eyes.

				“I’m afraid he’s already filed the papers. I probably shouldn’t have told you, but you all are señoritas now. I think you can handle it,” Abuelita Remedios said.

				Juanita blinked, fighting back her tears as she looked up at us. “There’s no hope, then. He’s gone for good?” she asked. “Why didn’t Mamá just tell us what was going on? Did she think we were never going to find out? How long did she think she could keep this a secret?”

				Abuelita patted the mattress beside her, signaling my sisters to join us on her bed. She scooted back to let us all snuggle up to her. “I’m sure she thought she was protecting you,” Abuelita explained, putting her arms around us as far as she could.

				“Things are never going to get better, are they?” Juanita asked. “Mamá’s never going to get over this. And there’s nothing we can do to change it. Not if he’s never coming back.”

				Abuelita pulled Juanita into her arms and held her tight. “Oh, that’s not true. Eventually, your Mamá will get over him.”

				“But I always hoped that he would . . .” Velia trailed off.

				“ — come back and make things better,” Delia mumbled, finishing Velia’s thought.

				 Both girls looked absolutely crushed. Papá’s slow, painful abandonment had wounded us deeply at first, but we had managed to get beyond it by telling ourselves we were free spirits and nothing could ever destroy us. However, looking around the room, I could see that wasn’t the case at all. Apparently, I wasn’t the only one who had never given up on him, because we were all openly crying now.

				“Well, I can only pray he reconsiders,” Abuelita Remedios said, looking at us like we were her own daughters. “Lord knows I tried talking some sense into him.”

				“But he hasn’t done it yet, has he? He hasn’t divorced her?” I asked, wondering how Mamá was able to keep her sanity with everything that was going on with us. How awful we had been to her!

				“There is that,” Abuelita said, reaching out to caress our faces one by one, listening to our unhappy sighs.

				“Ay, pobrecita Mamá!” Juanita wailed, giving in to her tears. “What she must be going through.”

				Velia’s eyes were suddenly full of rage. “Papá can be such a jerk!”

				“I’m ashamed of being his daughter,” Delia added.

				“We have to get back to Mamá,” Juanita whispered, looking to the rest of us for support. “Mamá is in a lot of pain right now. She needs to hear that we still love her. Think about it. When was the last time you reached out to her?”

				“Well, it’s hard to get close to her when all she does is yell at us or go to her room and cry,” Velia said defensively.

				“Well, hello? She’s been abandoned!” I pointed out emphatically. “And what did we do to make things better for her? Were we concerned? Did we make things easier for her? No. We abandoned her too. We stole Papá’s car and took off. No note. No phone call. No explanation.” I paused, wondering if I should voice my previous thoughts aloud, then charged ahead. “Maybe . . . maybe Cecilia and the lechuzas were right about us. Maybe we are wicked children.”

				“We are. We took advantage of her state of mind,” Juanita concluded, biting her lip nervously.

				“We stopped doing our chores and ran wild and did whatever we wanted when we should have been taking care of her,” I pointed out with disgust.

				“We should go home and ask her to forgive us,” Velia whispered, hanging her head.

				“For being as selfish as Papá,” Delia finished her twin’s thought.

				“We should take her some flowers or something,” Pita said, looking at Abuelita Remedios for approval. Her face was scrunched with wretchedness.

				“Yes, we have to go home and find a way of making things right for Mamá,” Delia concluded.

				Delia wiped away her tears roughly with the back of her hand. “I think it was actually all our fault,” she declared. “Papá left because we’re pesadas, too much to handle. He left because we didn’t listen to him half the time and we’re always getting in trouble with Mamá. And, well, I think he was just sick of hearing about it.”

				Pita used the bottom of her shirt to wipe at her eyes. “You mean he doesn’t love us anymore?” Pita asked.

				“Would you? If you had us for daughters?” Delia asked Pita, looking at her sister resentfully.

				That’s when I realized the evil of what the lechuzas said about us. We had been bad, yes, but was what Papá did our fault? “Yes, I would still love us,” I said, angry with myself for not realizing the twins had been blaming themselves for Papá’s absence all this time. “The way I see it, we didn’t fail Papá, he failed us. He’s the adult here.”

				 Abuelita reached into her pocket and handed Pita a handkerchief. Pita took it and blew her nose into it indelicately. “Now, you listen to me, muchachitas!” Abuelita Remedios’s eyes darkened with emotion. “The truth is, adults don’t always make sense. They don’t always do what’s right. Sometimes, they are like children themselves, doing whatever they want. Cada cabeza es un mundo, they have a mind of their own. Do you understand?”

				“I think so,” Velia whispered, nodding her head.

				“Sometimes, men leave, for whatever reason,” Abuelita continued. “Nothing you did or could have done differently would have changed that. So I want you to stop blaming yourselves or your Mamá for the choices your father has made. Instead, I want you to continue taking care of each other the way you’ve been doing so far. I’m so proud of you for standing up for your hermanitas against those evil creatures. I’m sure having to do that has taught you how important it is to stick together and love one another more than anything else in the world.”

				With those words, Abuelita Remedios gathered us closer around her. We went into her arms and let her hold us. She held us tight and said, “What’s done is done. The best thing you can do is go home and let your Mamá know you’re all right. You’re all she cares about right now.”





		 			 				PART III

				THE RETURN

				How my sisters and I were trapped in Mexico, but with the aid of the ear pendant, we were transported across the border and were taken home by the FBI. How we encountered, rejected, and sent Papá away. And how we eventually gained happiness with Mamá.




