
coronado con tunas moradas.”

				THE CACTUS: “Oh, what a regal cactus,

crowned with purple prickly pears.”



				 				 				 				 				 				Shortly after breakfast the next morning, we stuffed our belongings into our backpacks and headed home. Abuelita Remedios was sitting at the table drinking coffee when we went into the kitchen. Sitting next to her hand, on the table, was a small pile of tiny homemade envelopes. She took them and placed them in my hand when I sat next to her. “Something to get you started,” she said, closing my hand over them.

				“What are they?” I took the sealed rectangles and turned them over to read the hand-printed labels.

				“Semillitas — from my garden to yours,” Abuelita said.

				I looked through the assortment of seed packets she had put together for me and almost burst into tears. “I’m going to miss you, Abuelita Remedios.”

				 “Me too,” my grandmother said, pulling me close for a hug.

				“I’m going to miss you too,” Delia chimed in.

				Abuelita let me go long enough to hug Delia. I put the seed packets in the left pocket of my shorts and wiped my eyes. “I wish we could have stayed longer.”

				Our grandmother pulled a handkerchief out of her dress pocket and dabbed at her eyes. “I know. Me too.”

				“Don’t be sad, Abuelita.” Pita squeezed in with us and put her arms around our grandmother’s neck. “We love you. You’re the bestest grandma ever. You are, Abuelita. That’s why we love you so much.”

				Velia let out a disgusted groan and rolled her eyes. She looked down at Pita, and declared, “You’re such a kiss-up!”

				Abuelita smiled. “Oh, I know you love me, Pita, just like I know you love your mother. That’s why it’s important you get back there. She is going through a very difficult time right now; she needs you as much as you need her.” She patted our cheeks, kissed our foreheads, and caressed our hair before she continued. “Besides, now that you know where I live, you can start visiting me more often — only maybe you can drive with your Mamá next time. You and your Mamá are welcome to come stay with me whenever you want, for as long as you want, especially at Christmas time.”

				“Oh yes! We’ll bring presents, and eat tamales, and stay up every night,” exclaimed Pita, not at all sounding like a kiss-up, but like her true generous self, the Pita that Mamá knows and loves and babies more than the rest of us.

				“That sounds like a plan,” Abuelita Remedios said, hugging each of us in turn again. “We’ll do that then. Every Christmas. Every holiday. But especially in the summertime.”

				I hated to break up this moment, but it was getting late. “We should get going,” I whispered.

				Immediately after breakfast, Abuelita drove us in an old four-door ranch truck. She hadn’t driven in almost ten years, she said. Mostly, she kept the vehicle for emergencies. Everything that needed to be driven to and from the hacienda was taken care of by either Roberto or his son, Arturo, who loved to go into town. But today she’d decided to drive us to the border herself because there was only room in the pickup for six people. Her driving was a little rusty, which made for an interesting ride. Sometimes she’d veer out of her lane for a second or slow down so much, she’d be driving way below the speed limit. But all in all, I felt confident in her ability to get us to the Frontera safely.

				During the ride, the girls were somber, almost distant, but Abuelita Remedios was full of spunk. She talked all the way up Highway 57, giving us advice about how to handle questions we might encounter about our adventures in Mexico. She didn’t believe in lying — was against it in fact — but she also didn’t feel we should go around telling people things that would make them think we were fibbing.

				“Nowadays, people are too cynical and don’t believe in magic anymore,” Abuelita Remedios said as she drove us down the road. “Best to keep all those supernatural experiences to yourselves. No use trying to convince people of things they can’t understand, much less believe.”

				It was good advice, and we all agreed Mamá would be the only one who would ever believe us. Because to be honest, if I hadn’t lived it myself, I wouldn’t have believed it either.

				Halfway up to the border, Abuelita stopped to buy us new outfits before we drove on. She said she didn’t want Mamá to see us dressed like limosneras and think we’d taken to begging for food in the streets during our stay in Mexico. We slipped into our new clothes in the dressing room of a quiet little dress shop on the outskirts of Monclova. Pita was especially joyful to be wearing a new dress, although she rejected the one with a silky red bow at the collar, saying she was too old to wear moños.

				We all smiled gratefully and thanked our grandmother when she pulled the tags off our new outfits, handed them to the saleslady, and said, “They’ll be wearing these out.”

				After the morning’s shopping, Abuelita Remedios bought us some lunch. We stood on the sidewalk on Avenida 4 in Monclova eating taquitos off an old vendor’s cart. Looking around the busy streets with their modern buildings, I thought Mamá would be enamored of this place. Monclova looked as beautiful and as cultured as any large city in the United States. I relaxed and ate jícama dusted with chili powder from a tall fruit cup and told myself we could move here if Papá never came back and we lost the house.

				Soon after that bittersweet moment with our newfound grandmother, we got back on Highway 57 North and drove straight through Sabinas and Nueva Rosita. We stopped in Allende for some aguas frescas at a puesticito, but other than that, we stayed on the road.

				We arrived in Piedras Negras at three in the afternoon. The sun cast golden rays lazily upon the quieting city from its low point in the sky. Abuelita pulled over and parallel parked in front of the Santuario de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe. She got out of the vehicle and stretched her legs as she looked around.

				“Now who wants a raspa?” she asked, eyeing us with mischief in her eyes. “Well come on, don’t be shy.”

				After Abuelita Remedios treated us to raspas and campechanas, those delicious puffed pastries we all loved so much, we walked back to the truck. We sat in the pickup and tried to enjoy our last moments with our beloved grandmother.

				“Well, girls. It’s time we say good-bye. I wish I had a green card, or even a worker’s visa, but I haven’t had much need for those things, not with my own place to run. So this is as far as I can go with you. You’ll have to take a taxi across. Here,” Abuelita said, reaching into her purse and handing me a small wad of American bills. “Where are your papers? We’ll have to show them to the driver.”

				The question, like a hit to the temple, jostled something loose in my head, and suddenly my heart was in a panic. “Papers? Wait a minute! Did any of you bring your birth certificates? I know I didn’t.” I’d run out of the house in such a panic to stop Juanita driving away that the thought never occurred to me.

				“Yeah,” Juanita said. “I got all of them. They’re in Velia’s backpack.”

				Velia put her hands on the bench seat beside Juanita and pulled herself forward in her seat. “No they’re not.”

				“What do you mean? Where are they?” Abuelita asked, turning sideways to give Velia her full attention.

				Juanita stopped eating her raspa. “What are you talking about? I gave them to you, when you were getting ready. I sat them right there, on your dresser, next to your clothes.”

				“Juanita,” Velia whined. “I never saw them!”

				“You mean you didn’t bring them?” Juanita asked, putting a hand to her forehead and shaking her head in disbelief. “Oh my God. I can’t believe this.”

				Velia slid back into her seat like a turtle trying to get back in its shell. “I’m sorry! We were so focused on leaving that I didn’t even notice them.”

				I picked Juanita’s backpack off the floorboard, unzipped it, and started pulling everything out of it. “Are you sure you didn’t put them in here?”

				“I’m sure,” Juanita said, pushing her hair out of her face in frustration.

				I unzipped every zipper and looked through every pocket of Juanita’s backpack, making sure no documents were hiding there. “Delia? Pita? Did you bring anything else? Your school IDs, anything that might prove we are who we say we are.”

				“School IDs aren’t going to help us. You need state IDs or birth certificates to get across,” Delia said. “And, no, I didn’t bring mine either.”

				I dumped Juanita’s backpack onto the floorboard and sat with my back pressed against the truck’s door, looking at Abuelita as I rubbed my forehead. Suddenly, I had a massive headache. “I can’t believe this. After everything we’ve been through, and now we can’t go home.”

				“Now hold on, let’s not get melodramatic,” Abuelita said. She pointed behind me, to the other side of the plaza. “All we have to do is go in there, to the aduana offices, and tell them everything. Well, not everything, remember what we talked about. None of that magical, mystical stuff. We don’t want to lose credibility. Anyway, they’ll get in touch with the authorities on the other side and someone will get a hold of your mother. It will take some time, but they’ll sort it out. It’s in their best interest to get the matter resolved as soon as possible, especially with all the media attention you’ve been getting, so I’m sure you won’t be waiting too long. You’ll be home sometime tonight. I’m sure of it.”

				Pita sat forward on her seat and poked her head over Abuelita to look at us. “Do you really mean tonight? Where would we wait while they cleared things up?”

				“Oh, I’m sure they have some kind of facility where we can wait,” Abuelita began.

				“You mean like a detention center?” Delia’s high-pitched voice echoed the horror in her wide eyes.

				“Oh, I’m not staying in a detention facility on this side of the border,” Velia said, shaking her head. “Cecilia said the police are corrupt, and you’ve heard the stories! People have to pay huge bribes just to see their family members when they’re detained on this side of the border. Mamá can’t even afford to pay the phone bill. There’s no way she’d have the money to get all five of us back.”

				“Not all rumors are true,” Abuelita said, a frown marring her forehead. “Not everyone is corrupt.”

				“Let me see that,” Juanita reached back and pulled on Velia’s backpack until Velia wiggled her shoulders out of the straps and handed her the bag. Frantic, Juanita rummaged through Velia’s bag like her life depended on it. “Regardless, I don’t think we should take any chances by going to the authorities. Even if they were to do right by us, the whole thing would create an international incident. The media would catch wind of it and things could really get out of control then.”

				She had a point. It was already bad enough that we’d gotten all the media attention we’d gotten so far. The police couldn’t let that kind of thing slide if a reporter were to wonder who was at fault and maybe call for someone’s punishment. “Child Protection Services would probably get involved,” I said. “Mamá would definitely be in trouble then.”

				Juanita pushed her fists into the empty backpack on her lap, which deflated as she leaned over like she was going to be sick. “It’s no use. They’re not here.”

				“Wait a minute,” I said. I opened the door to step out of the truck, looking up at the building we’d parked beside. “I can’t believe it! The answer has been sitting right here all along.”

				“What are you talking about?” Abuelita asked, joining me on the sidewalk.

				The rest of the girls left the truck to cluster around us. Juanita followed my gaze and stared up at the santuario. “What’s going on?”

				“This is it. The Virgin’s sanctuary, her home,” I said, taking in the beauty of the ancient cement building with its stained-glass windows and tall central tower.

				“So what are you saying?” Velia asked. “You think we should pray?”

				I turned to Abuelita Remedios, put my arms around her, and squeezed her with all my might. “Thank you!” I said. “You couldn’t have brought us to a more ideal place. Ladies, we’re going to do more than pray. We’re going to go in there and ask for a miracle.”

				“A miracle?” Pita straightened her clothes as she stared at the church.

				“Yes.” I let go of Abuelita and started off for the wooden doors of the santuario. “Come on. I have one more spin left.”

				Inside the dark, empty church, I walked to the nearest pew, held onto the edge of the seat, dropped to one knee, and crossed myself. Then I turned left, intentionally passing the replica of the body of Christ. I touched the glass of the ancient display case and said a brief silent prayer as I continued to make my way to the altar of the Virgen de Guadalupe at the front of the church.

				Like little ducks, the girls mimicked my every move until we were all standing in front of the virgin’s altar, crossing ourselves, one right after the other. Abuelita reached into her pocket, pulled out a worn leather coin purse and deposited six coins into the slot of the metal box in front of the iron candleholder. Then she took a long wooden stick, borrowed flame from a burning wick, and lit a new candle. She passed the stick around and we all took turns lighting our own candles.

				“Ready?” I whispered as I took Juanita’s hand on one side and Abuelita’s hand on the other. “Get in close.”

				I watched the rest of the girls take each other’s hands until we were all standing in a semicircle, joined in prayer before the Virgen de Guadalupe, la Madre de México, our Holy Mother standing on a bed of roses.

				“Here we go,” I whispered. “Bow your heads and close your eyes.”

				Everyone did as they were told. I let go of Abuelita’s hand long enough to give the ear pendant a spirited flick. It spun to life, humming a joyous tune as I took Abuelita’s hand back in mine and started to pray out loud. “Virgencita Santa, Holy Mother, we have done as you asked. We delivered a man to his wife and children and tried our best to stay humble and kind and gave mercy when it was asked of us. Aztec queen, Tonantzin, Holy Mother of all mankind, lend us your magical assistance one last time. Please help us cross the Rio Grande, deliver us home to our Mamá.”

				At my words, the ear pendant whizzed and whirled like a top, sending thousands of tiny, exquisite vibrations to every nerve in my body. Then my body jolted and my eyes flew open, as if I’d been suddenly awakened from a nightmare.

				Even as I blinked to focus in disbelief, I knew the vision before my eyes could not have been anything else but a dream. For we were all standing huddled together before a serene sky. A foggy mist swirled around us and before us lay a moonlit path that led straight up to the stars.

				Pita opened her eyes and her mouth dropped. “Whoa!”

				“What is in the — ” Velia began to say something, but she was so shocked by her surroundings, she couldn’t finish her thought.

				“What is this?” Delia asked. “Some kind of hallucination?”

				I put my foot in front of me and took a tentative step forward. My sisters moved around, prodding and testing the moonlit path with each footstep as they milled around. “No. It’s real,” I said. “Come on. This is going to make your sopapillas curl up.”

				As if mesmerized by the sound of some celestial being softly beckoning to us, we followed the moonlit path to the heavens, silently walking on stardust and moonbeams until we reached the summit of a hill and stopped. A brilliant dawn broke through the morning dew, caressed every shadow, and lifted the fog to reveal a floor of white clouds dotting an azure sky. Before us stood a giant cactus patch, each pad covered with budding prickly fruit that sparkled in the light, like tanzanites.

				At the top of the hill, a youthful Tonantzin, the Goddess of Sustenance, the girl who had saved us from the nagual, lifted her arms to welcome us, her beloved daughters. And when I looked around, I saw that a flurry of magnificent mariposas swarmed around us as we stood waiting on the summit of the hill, awed by the surreal beauty that surrounded us.

				“Are we dreaming?” Juanita asked.

				“Dreams are revelations,” Tonantzin said, smiling down at us from her altar of cacti. “You have come far, my children. And I am proud of you.”

				“We shouldn’t have come,” I said, hanging my head. “My sister got hurt and we’ve put our mother in a bad position. She might never trust us again.”

				“The mother is the earth, the creator. Every part of her is alive,” Tonantzin said. “She is the river, the flower, the bud. She is the regenerator. Her faith in her offspring is always alive.”

				“What did she say?” Pita asked, her face screwed up in confusion.

				Abuelita put a finger up to her closed lips to show Pita she should be quiet and pay attention to what the virgen had to say.

				“Hijita mía, youngest of my daughters, la más pequeña de mis Mariposas,” the goddess said, turning her attention to Pita. “Do you have a question?”

				“We all do,” Velia interrupted.

				Abuelita Remedios reached up and wrapped her arms around Velia and Pita’s shoulders protectively. “Forgive them, Great Mother. They do not mean to disrespect you or question your judgment. They are good girls, but they are also curious — inquisitive to a fault. It’s what makes them brave. But you knew that already, I’m sure.”

				The Virgen smiled at Abuelita, and her radiance shone brightly upon us as she said, “Yes. That is why I chose them.”

				“You said Mamá is a flower, so she is basically good to us,” Velia said. “But what about Papá? Why did he leave us?”

				Delia, upon hearing her twin sister’s question, pushed her way to the forefront to stand between me and Abuelita. “Forget that. When’s he coming back?”

				“Your father is like the sun, splendid to behold, but he must descend and let darkness rule for a time.”

				“I don’t get it,” Pita said.

				The virgen stepped down from her throne and touched Pita’s face. “Without night there would be no rest, no room for growth. It is just the way things are,” Tonantzin explained in a serene voice.

				“You speak in riddles, like Llorona,” I accused her. “I don’t get it. If dreams are supposed to reveal things to us does that mean we’re dreaming now? And if we are, then how come I’m more confused than I ever was?”

				“I know you don’t understand what is happening with your family,” Tonantzin said gently. “But you will, when the time comes. A new dawn is approaching, but you are very clever, very brave. You will not be blinded by his light.”

				“So why did you set us on this path?” I asked. “What were we supposed to accomplish? Can you at least tell us that much?”

				“Odilia, you are here because I needed your assistance,” Tonantzin said, fixing me with her gentle gaze. “And you’ve been very helpful. You might not realize it yet, but you’ve learned many lessons along the way, about your Mamá and about life. However, there is one more thing you must do to complete your task. I need you to remind the mother that she is the flower, the bud, the giver of life. She needs to be honored with love and redemption.”

				I let out an exasperated sigh. “Honored with love and redemption? How am I supposed to do that when I don’t even understand what you are saying?” I didn’t want to disrespect the virgen, but this explanation just left me more confused.

				Tonantzin placed her hands on my shoulder and suddenly I wasn’t so overwhelmed. Her gentle smile, her luminous eyes, her rose scented perfume filled me with an inner calm, and I felt blessed. “Soon, you will understand everything.”

				Mesmerized by her glory, I reached out and touched the sleeve of her emerald gown. “Go on,” the goddess said, extending her arm out to my sisters, who all touched the sleeve of her garment and oohed and aahed when it came to life, glittering at their touch, infusing us with sunlight and warmth. “When your journey is over everything will make sense and you will live joyful, productive lives. But first, you must pick the rosas de castilla,” Tonantzin said, pointing behind me.

				I turned to follow her hand and saw the clouds lifting and the earth rising up to meet us. Up and up it came, until we were standing in our path in the woods by the Rio Grande. There, at the bottom of a hill, off the beaten path, amidst a cloud of glorious mariposas, a patch of rosebushes began to break through the ground, bursting to life one right after another, until the hill was covered in white rosebuds that bloomed in the morning light.

				Tonantzin began to walk toward the rosebushes. We followed her down the path, and as we did, I noticed her feet were bare. But she walked without regard to burrs or thorns, for as she stepped forth the ground beneath her became carpeted with fluorescent rose petals.

				“They’re beautiful,” Juanita whispered as we came upon the cluster of blooming rosebushes.

				The Virgen reached over, plucked a perfect blossom from the bush and handed it to me. I took it and instinctively brought it up to my nose. Its heady perfume overwhelmed my senses and I felt dizzy for a moment. “Give the roses to the mother,” Tonantzin said. “They will remind her of who she is, who we are, and what we are all meant to become.”

				“Roses,” I said, trying to imprint her instructions into my mind. “On the hill. When we wake up. Okay. I can do that.”

				“They will bring light into her eyes,” Tonantzin continued. “They will transform her.”

				“The mother?” Velia asked. “Is she talking about Mamá?”

				“I think so,” I said as Tonantzin turned away from us. We followed Tonantzin as she walked back up to her altar. She stood on the cacti, her feet unharmed by the prickly pears and thorns.

				“So this is what it’s all about?” I asked, as we stood before her again. “Giving her flowers?”

				“She has earned them,” Tonantzin said. “Paid for them with tears of gold. Give her the roses and you will bring her back to life. If you do this, you and your sisters will be blessed forever. You will look up at the sky and know that you played your part in creating new life in our universe. But to end, you must begin. It is time for you to go.”

				“Pick the flowers. Give them to the mother,” I whispered to myself. And even as I said it over and over again, reminding myself of what had to be done, I wondered why Tonantzin kept referring to our mother as “the” mother. Her word choice seemed odd and old-fashioned, almost regal in a way. Ancient kings used to refer to themselves as “we” and “us,” so it was probably common for the ancient goddess Tonantzin, the Holy Mother of all mankind, to use the word “the” to refer to other mothers in her care.

				As I pondered this, the silhouette of the goddess began to change. The light that had surrounded us faded into darkness and Tonantzin slowly disappeared into the night. The stars began to shine all around us, and the path of stardust and moonbeams reappeared beneath our feet. We walked down the moonlit trail toward a dark and misty shore, a surreal place, a place somewhere between sleep and wakefulness.




