
pero nada dice.”

				THE MOON:“The moon sees everything,

but says nothing.”



				 				 				 				It surprised me quite a bit that we should miss Papá. After all, he’d been out of our lives for almost a year before his return. Nevertheless, for weeks after the incident, the girls sat around discussing it, wishing things could have been different. That he had loved us more. That we had been enough of a family to keep him home.

				Not me. I kept my feelings for Papá tucked away, like a tiny rosebud hidden within the pages of an old forgotten book. Back in the darkest corner of my heart it lay, so well pressed that its fragile edges might chip, break off, even disintegrate if I tried to touch it.

				Some days, however, for no apparent reason and without my awareness, sorrow would crack my resolve. I’d be tending my herb garden, clipping sprigs of fragrant leaves or replanting tender roots, then all of a sudden, a single tear would fall down my face without my awareness, surprising me. Perplexed, I would touch it and wonder what had happened to bring it forth. The answer was always there, tucked away within the brittle pages of that closed book — Papá.

				After a while, however, my wounds began to heal, and I found that I didn’t cry unexpectedly anymore. My heart had accepted the loss, and like my sisters, I too began to move on. School started up again, and we all went willingly, even gratefully, back to a normal life. I tended my herb garden every day and when Mamá cut her hand peeling nopales, I put milenrama on it. When she saw that it had healed quickly, Mamá suggested I might become a doctor someday. I think I like that.

				The weekend after Easter, we celebrated my birthday with a Sweet Sixteen party. The event was strange and unusual to us. Our friends and loved ones were used to attending debutant balls, but since I didn’t have one the year before, this party was like my make-up quinceañera.

				It was a beautiful reception. Mamá had taken extra care to decorate the backyard with white ribbons. There were calla lilies at every table, and the deck was shining with the twinkling of white icicle lights that trailed over trees and shrubs to create the illusion of a fairyland, a garden for mariposas.

				Juanita and the twins were my official damas, my female attendants, and each of us had been assigned a nice, handsome dancing partner, a chambelán. We’d fretted about finding boys to be our official escorts, but Mamá had a lot of comadres and they had a lot of sons from which to choose. She did a nice job, because I was assigned the handsomest boy in the neighborhood. His name was Mario Cortés, and he had big green eyes. I liked him very much.

				The night of the party was soft and dreamy, with a warm breeze drifting in and out of our backyard. The girls and I danced with our escorts until the balls of our feet hurt, and we were forced to slip off our heels and dance in our bare feet. Mario kept stepping on my toes, so I had to jump back every time he got creative. It was silly, but we laughed about it most of the night.

				By midnight, I was still keeping an eye on his shiny shoes when I saw something moving behind the trees to the left of our house. At the rustle of leaves, I froze and Mario bumped into me head-on, almost knocking me to the ground. He grabbed at my corsage to try to keep me from falling.

				“Ouch,” he said, releasing me suddenly.

				“Are you all right?” I asked, keeping an eye to the left of me, trying to figure out who was hiding in the foliage. For a second I thought it might be Pita looking for fireflies, but she was standing at the cake table, digging into her second helping.

				“I cut myself on your corsage,” Mario said, sucking on the side of his index finger.

				“Let me see,” I said, examining his hand. “It’s just a pinprick. You’ll live.”

				“Oh yeah, tell that to Sleeping Beauty,” Mario protested teasingly.

				A man stepped out of the shadows into the well-lit yard. “Oh my God!” I whispered.

				“What? What’s going on?” Mario asked, following my gaze.

				Papá stood in front of our two lime trees, looking across the dance floor with his hands in his pockets. However, it wasn’t me he was looking at, but Mamá, who was dancing at the other end of the yard with a man in a pinstriped shirt and navy blue slacks, a man we had all come to know and love.

				“I’ll be right back,” I said, leaving Mario to wonder what was going on.

				As I walked toward him, Papá turned to look at me, and his face broke into a rueful smile that didn’t quite match the sadness in his hazel eyes.

				“It gladdens my heart to see you like this, Odilia. All grown up,” Papá whispered as I leaned in and allowed him to give me a small, reserved hug. I had not expected to see him that night, but the mildness in his voice told me he had not come to make trouble. “Feliz cumpleaños, m’ija.”

				“Thank you. You look handsome tonight,” I said, returning his rueful smile.

				“Thanks,” he said, fiddling with the boot slider on his bolo tie and looking at the ground nervously. “I didn’t want to embarrass you on your special night.”

				“Right,” I said, not sure of what else to say to him.

				“I know you probably weren’t expecting me, but I just needed to come. I wanted to talk with your Mamá. I had hoped . . . well, that she and I . . .” He looked sideways toward Mamá, who was still dancing, oblivious to us.

				“Oh,” I said, suddenly understanding.

				“She looks happy,” he said.

				I turned around just in time to see Special Agent Aaron Gonzales spin and twirl Mamá to the beat of a fast paced cumbia. Aaron had been right about CPS. After a brief investigation, they decided there was nothing wrong with our little family, but the experience deeply affected Mamá. It had taken a long time, months and months, but Mamá changed. She had inched herself into the process, like a caterpillar. First, she had changed her work schedule so she could go to night school. Within months she’d taken her GED test and received her certificate. After that, she started to attend community college and got a new job as a clerk in a private school, where her boss didn’t mind if she kept a close eye on her daughters. She had grown in many ways, but especially in love.

				In Aaron, Mamá had found a strong heart, and she’d attached herself to the offered hand slowly, cautiously, making sure he was the right man with whom to start a new life. But when she’d emerged from the safety of her cocoon, Mamá was happier and more radiant than we’d ever seen her. In our eyes, she was reborn into beauty — celestial, divine. And we couldn’t be happier for her.

				“She’s like a butterfly — radiant,” I said, letting out a long held breath. “Everything’s all right now.”

				“Listen, about what happened . . .” Papá began, his voice suddenly full of emotion, and I felt kind of sorry for him because I knew what he was about to divulge.

				Stories about him and what had transpired after he left our house that last time were everywhere in our neighborhood. My sisters and I couldn’t go anywhere without someone giving us the latest gossip, filling in the holes where someone else had left off. The rumor mill had it that six weeks into his marriage, his new wife ran off with a rancher who had a big house on a hundred-acre spread in Nuevo Laredo. But that wasn’t the bad part. She’d cleaned out his bank account before she left him, taking with her every penny he’d ever saved from his years as a quasi-famous Tejano singer. I heard he was singing again, but tonight I didn’t feel up to asking him where or when. It seemed irrelevant, nothing more than idle chitchat.

				“It’s okay,” I interrupted. “We don’t have to talk about it.”

				“No. It’s not okay,” Papá continued. His voice was suddenly clipped, terse, as if what he was about to say made him angry. “What I did was wrong. I made a terrible mistake.”

				“Well, it’s over now,” I said, hugging him quickly, woodenly, trying to pull myself away from the situation. “I should get back to the party.”

				“Odilia.” Papá took my hand and tugged on it gently, pulling me in closer to kiss me on the cheek and caress my hair. “You look beautiful. Have a good time.”

				“Thanks for coming,” I said, taking my hand out of his and turning away from him.

				“Okay,” he whispered. Then, taking one last look around the yard, he turned around and walked away. As he disappeared behind the lime trees lining the side of our house, I stood trembling in my bare feet, wondering if we’d ever be close again, the way we were before he’d abandoned us.

				Juanita came up behind me. She stood silently beside me, looking past the trees and shrubs at the lone figure of a man moving away from our house, crossing the street, and finally driving away in his car.

				“And he didn’t even bring a present,” Juanita lamented. She put her arms around me protectively and leaned in to kiss my cheek.

				“He did,” I said, swallowing my tears. Her warmth engulfed me. “You just can’t see it.”

				I turned around and looked for Mamá. She wasn’t dancing anymore. She was standing across the yard pulling the twins and Pita into her arms and laughing at something. It was at that very moment that I knew with certainty we would always be one, together forever, protecting our loved ones, braving the wind and illuminating the sky.

THE END





		 			 AUTHOR'S

NOTE



				 				 				 				I have always been fascinated by the knowledge and wisdom of our ancestors, the Aztecas. Their culture, their scientific observations, their religion, their architecture, their language, their myths and legends — everything about them is extraordinary. I wanted to write a story that brought all the magic and wonder of my ancestors to my readers. I wrote Summer of the Mariposas with the intention of showcasing both our modern and ancient mitos y leyendas by juxtaposing them against one of the greatest stories ever told, The Odyssey.

				People ask me why I chose the horrible, much-feared La Llorona to be the mystical mentor or spiritual guide for my beloved girls. I think it’s because I’ve always believed La Llorona to be much maligned, and in a sense I wanted to show her in a positive light.

				I think of La Llorona in all her various mythological and legendary forms, and I feel sorry for her. As Malitzin, the Aztec slave girl given to Hernán Cortés, I find her to be one of our culture’s most controversial and misunderstood historical figures. Legend says that when she became Cortés’s interpreter and mistress she caused the fall of Tenochtitlan, and so the people refused to call her by her given name and began to refer to her as Malinche, the traitor.

				However, while some defame Malitzin, she is celebrated by others. They see her as a savior, the founder of Mexico, for without her assistance Hernán Cortés would never have defeated the indigenous tribes of Mexico and given birth to a new nation. Malitzin’s son by Cortés, Don Martín, was one of the first Mestizos born in Mexico.

				Over the years, history and legend blended and the truth became blurred and smudged, but somewhere along the way Malitzin became associated with the mythological figure La Llorona. According to the stories, Cortés left Mexico to go back to court. There he became enamored of and engaged to a Spanish noblewoman, so he returned to Mexico to retrieve his children. It was that treacherous act that supposedly sent Malinche into such a rage as to take her two children and drown them in the river to spite Cortés.

				Somehow, I find that too abhorrent an act for any mother to carry through. I’d like to believe that something else happened, something horrible and unexpected and completely out of her hands. Why else would she refuse to rest, to wail an eternal penance, to look for her children for centuries? Why would she lose herself in her pain if she was anything but innocent? I think it was just easy for people to villainize Malitzin and believe her capable of killing her own children because she was so detested.

				However, by presenting Malitzin in a modern setting, I am giving her the occasion to tell “her side” of the story, to make us look into her heart and know that a mother’s love is pure, not selfish or malignant. Using La Llorona as a mystical guide afforded me the opportunity to redeem her. After all, as parents, we all make mistakes and we all deserve a chance to make things right, much like Mamá does at the end of this book when she transforms herself.

				Above all else, I wrote this story because I wanted to celebrate the extraordinary bond between children and their mamás. Mothers are very important. They have a special place en mi corazón.

				Mothers are for love.





		 				GLOSSARY



				abuelita (ah-bweh-LEE-tah): affectionate form of abuela (“grandmother”), similar to “grandma”

				aduana (ah-DWAH-nah): customs station at the United States entrance of a Mexican border town

				agua (AH-gwah): water

				agua bendita (ah-gwah behn-DEE-tah): holy water

				agua de tamarindo (AH-gwah de tah-mah-REEN-doh): cold drink made from the tamarind plant

				aguas frescas (AH-gwahs FREHS-kahs): cool drinks made from fresh fruit juices

				águila (AH-gee-lah): eagle

				ahora (ah-O-rah): now or today

				aire (AY-reh): air

				al (ahl): to the

				alacrán (ah-lah-KRAHN): scorpion

				amigo (ah-ME-go): friend

				Aramés, aramás, todavía nadamás, ven aquí, ven acá, aire frío, aire mío, hazlas mías, cinco hermanitas, cinco estrellitas, serán mías, aramés, arams: nonsensical phrases created to sound like a convoluted, mysterious spell, translated as: “Arames, aramas, already nothing, come here, come there, cold air, air of mine, make them mine, five little sisters, five little stars, will be mine, arames, aramas.”

				araña (ah-RAH-nyah): spider

				árbol (AHR-bol): tree

				argolla (ahr-GO-yah): earring

				arrepiéntanse (ah-rreh-pee-EHN-tahn-seh): repent

				atarántala (ah-tah-RAHN-tah-lah): stun [her]

				Ave María (AH-veh mah-REE-ah): Holy Mary

				Ay (ay): Oh

				Ay María Purísima (Ay mah-REE-ah poo-REE-see-mah): Oh, purest Holy Mary

				“¡Ay mis hijos!” (aye mees EE-hos): a saying credited to the mythological La Llorona, “Woe to my children!”

				Aztecas (ahs-THE-kah): the Aztecs

				babas (BAH-bahs): slobbering fool

				bebito (beh-BEE-toh): baby

				bendita (behn-DEE-tah): holy

				bien (bee-ehn): good, well, or very

				bien águila (bee-ehn AH-gee-lah): very smart, clever

				bobo (bo-bo): dummy

				borracho [as in borracho beans] (bo-RRAH-cho): drunk [here: pinto beans cooked 	with beer]

				bruja/brujo (BROO-hah/ BROO-ho): witch/warlock

				buen/buena/bueno (boo-EHN) (boo-EH-nah) (boo-EH-noh): good

				buenas noches (boo-EHN-ahs NO-chehs): good night

				buenos días (boo-EHN-ohs DEE-ahs): good morning, good day

				bulto (BOOL-to): [here] a bundle, bulk, shape, shadow, a piece of luggage

				cabeza (cah-BEH-sah): head

				cabrito (cah-BREE-to): a young goat cooked in a ground pit

				caca (CAH-kah): feces, excrement

				cada (CAH-dah): every

				caiga (CAY-gah): fall

				calabacita (cah-lah-bah-SEE-tah): squash [here: zucchini]

				calabaza (cah-lah-BAH-sah): squash [here slang: pumpkin-heads, dummies]

				calavera (cah-lah-VEH-rah): skull

				cállate (CAH-yah-teh): be quiet

				cálmate (CAHL-mah-the): settle down

				campechana (kahm-peh-CHAH-nah): flaky, buttery, honey-glazed sweet bread

				canícula (cah-NEE-koo-lah): dog days of summer

				cantor (cahn-TOR): singer, also one who calls out the Lotería cards as they are drawn in the game

				canto (CAHN-to): song, melody

				caso (CAH-so): consideration, concern

				cazo (CAH-so): cooking pot

				cerro (SEH-rro): hill

				chambelán (chahm-beh-LAHN): male escorting a female attendant at a quinceañera

				chanclas (CHAHN-klahs): sandals

				chaparrón (chah-pah-RRON): rain

				chalupa (chah-LOO-pah): a canoe or small rowing boat

				chalupita (chah-loo-PEE-tah): a small canoe, small rowing boat

				chiflada (chee-FLAH-dah): spoiled brat

				chilaquiles (chee-lah-KEE-lehs): breakfast food made with pieces of corn tortilla, eggs, and other savory ingredients: usually tomatoes, onions, and hot peppers (chiles)

				chiles (CHEE-lehs): hot peppers

				chinampa (chee-NAHM-pah) man-made island, commonly used during Aztec times on Lake Texcoco to grow crops

				chinchontle (cheen-CHON-tleh): fictitious plant used to sedate Odilia and her sisters

				chiquito (chee-KEE-to): little one, child

				chismosa (cheez-MOH-sah): person fond of gossiping

				chupacabras (choo-pah-KAH-brahs): mythological creature from Mexican folklore said to kill goats and other farm animals by sucking their blood

				cielo (see-EH-loh): sky

				Cihuacóatl (see-wah-CO-ahtl) [Nahuatl]: Aztec Mother Goddess, goddess of motherhood and fertility as well as midwives.

				cinco hermanitas (SEEN-koh ehr-mah-NEE-tahs): five little sisters

				claro que sí (CLAH-ro keh SEE): of course, yes

				clínica (CLEE-nee-kah): clinic, medical center

				cluecas (cloo-EH-cahs): brooding, slang for agitated or nervous

				cola (CO-lah): tail

				comadre (co-MAH-dreh): girlfriend, godparent

				comercio (co-MEHR-see-oh): store

				como (CO-mo): like

				compadre (com-PAH-dreh): close male friend, sometimes also godfather

				con (con): with

				cóndor (CON-dor): condor, large vulture

				corazón (co-rah-SOHN): heart

				Corazón Salvaje (co-rah-SOHN sahl-VAH-heh): the title of a popular Mexican soap opera which has been remade several times, most recently in 2009

				coyote (co-YO-teh): coyote

				cuando (coo-AHN-doh): when

				cuatita (kwah-TEE-tah): twin girl

				cueva (coo-EH-vah): cave

				cumbia (COOM-bee-ah): a type of dance with Colombian roots, often played at quiceañeras and other events where dancing is part of the celebration

				cumpleaños (coom-pleh-AH-nyos): birthday

				curandera (coo-rahn-DEH-rah): healer, especially one who uses medicinal herbs (feminine form)

				dama (DAH-mah): lady, title given to a girl who is part of the royal court in a quinceañera’s celebration.

				dan (dahn): give

				de (deh): of

				del (dehl): of the

				dejes (DEH-hehs): allow (past tense)

				demonias (deh-MO-nee-ahs): female demons, slang for “brats”

				desaparecida (deh-sah-pah-reh-SEE-dah): those who have disappeared (feminine)

				descuidada (dehs-coo-ee-DAH-dah): neglectful

				desprendió (dehs-prehn-dee-OH): detached

				diablito (dee-ah-BLEE-to): little devil

				diablo (dee-AH-blo): devil

				días (DEE-ahs): days

				diles (DEE-lehs): tell them

				Dios (dee-ohs): God

				Dios Santísimo (dee-ohs sahn-TEE-see-mo): Holy Father

				dorada (doh-RAH-dah): golden

				egoísta (eh-go-EES-tah): selfish, egotistical

				ejido (eh-HEE-doh): a system of communal or cooperative farming

				El Sacrificio (ehl sah-kree-FEE-see-oh): a small town in Coahuila, Mexico, off Hwy 57

				El Santuario de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe (ehl sahn-too-AH-ree-oh deh NWEHS-trah seh-NYO-rah deh gwah-dah-LOO-peh): Our Lady of Guadalupe, a Catholic church in Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico

				enchilada (en-chee-LAH-dah): rolled tortilla filled with cheese and sometimes beef or chicken and baked covered in red chili sauce

				en su gloria (ehn soo GLO-ree-ah): in all her splendor/glory

				es (ehs): is

				escalera (ehs-cah-LEH-rah): ladder

				escuincles (ehs-QUEEN-klehs): from Nahuatl itzcuintli (“dog”), meaning little kid

				está (ehs-TAH): is (refers to the speaker’s observation or perception of how something looks, feels, tastes, etc.)

				Estados Unidos (ehs-TAH-dos oo-NEE-dohs): the United States (of America)

				estás (ehs-TAHS): you are

				estrella (ehs-TREH-yah): star

				estrellita (ehs-treh-YEE-tah): little star

				fajita (fah-HEE-tah): skirt steak, usually grilled

				fantasma (fahn-TAHS-mah): phantom

				farmacia (fahr-MAH-see-ah): pharmacy

				Federales (feh-deh-RAH-lehs): Federal officers

				feliz cumpleaños (feh-LEES coom-pleh-AH-nyos): happy birthday

				fideo (fee-DEH-oh): vermicelli noodles cooked with chicken broth and salsa, Mexican style

				fiesta (fee-EHS-tah): party, celebration

				frontera (fron-TEH-rah): border

				gallina (gah-YEE-nah): hen

				gracias (GRAH-see-ahs): thank you

				greñas (GREH-nyahs): hair

				guacamole (gwah-kah-MO-leh): avocado dip made with salsa and lime

				guapo (GWAH-poh): handsome

				guato (GWAH-toh): outburst, fit, making a show

				Hacienda Dorada (ah-see-EHN-dah do-RAH-dah): Abuelita Remedios’s fictitious ranch in the woods beyond El Sacrificio, Coahuila, Mexico

				hago (AH-go): (I) make

				hija (EE-hah): daughter

				hijo (EE-ho): son

				horchata (orr-CHAH-tah): cold drink made with rice, barley, sesame seeds, and almonds

				hormiguita (orr-mee-GEE-tah): little ant

				huisache (wee-SAH-cheh): short, thorny tree with fernlike fronds, similar to mesquites

				Huitzilopochtli (weet-see-lo-POCHT-lee) [Nahuatl]: solar Aztec god, the wizard god

				jabalina (hah-bah-LEE-nah): peccary, javelina, skunk hog

				jaras (HAH-rahs): arrows

				jícama (HE-kah-mah): the spherical, elongated taproot of a yam bean

				jojotle (ho-HO-tleh): fictitious medicinal remedy for grogginess or drug overdose

				la aurora (lah ah-oo-RO-rah): the dawn

				La Laguna de Texcoco (lah lah-GOO-nah deh tehx-CO-co): Texcoco Lake, Mexico City, Mexico

				La Llorona (lah yo-RO-nah): the “Weeping Woman,” a legendary character whose eternal penance for having drowned her children is to try to find them, said to carry off children who misbehave

				La Sirena (lah see-REH-nah): the siren or mermaid

				lechuzas (leh-CHOO-sahs): barn owls, or in Mexican folklore, mythological creatures said to have the body of a bird and the face of a witch, believed to punish evildoers

				levantan (leh-VAHN-tan): awaken

				limosnas (lee-MOS-nahs): money attained from begging

				limosnera (lee-mos-NEH-rah): beggar, street urchin

				llores (YO-rehs): cry

				llueva (yoo-EH-vah): to rain

				Lotería (lo-teh-REE-ah): a popular board game in Mexico, played with individual game boards called tablas and calling cards with images like La Sirena, the Siren.

				Lupita (loo-PEE-tah): nickname for Guadalupe

				¡Madre de Dios! (MAH-dreh deh dee-os): exclamation, Mother of God!

				mal aire (mahl AY-reh): bad air

				malas (MAH-lahs): bad

				malcriadas (mahl-cree-AH-dahs): spoiled

				Malitzin [also known as Malinche] (mah-LEEN-tzeen): Aztec Princess who betrayed her people and handed over the Aztec kingdom to the Spanish Conquistador, Hernán Cortés

				Mamá (mah-MAH): Mom

				mamita (mah-MEE-tah): slang, little sister

				mariposa (mah-ree-POH-sah): butterfly

				marranito (mah-rrah-NEE-toh): dense pastry shaped like a piglet made with sweet molasses and spices

				mecate (meh-CAH-teh): rope

				mía/mío (MEE-ah/MEE-oh): mine

				migra (MEE-grah): slang, border patrol

				m’ija/m’ijita(MEE-hah/mee-HEE-tah): term of endearment meaning “beloved daughter”

				milenrama (meel-ehn-RRAH-mah): yarrow (or acquilea, after Achilles), an herb used to heal wounds and hemorrhaging

				mira (MEE-rah): see

				mis (MEES): my

				mojarra (mo-HAH-rrah): perch

				molcajete (mol-kah-HEH-teh): mortar

				mole (MOH-leh): rich brown sauce made of chili peppers, spices, chocolate, and peanut butter, usually served with chicken or turkey

				molino (mo-LEE-no): windmill

				Monclova (mon-CLO-vah): city in Coahuila, Mexico, off Hwy 57

				moño (MO-nyo): a bow

				mordida (mor-DEE-dah): bite

				muchachita (moo-chah-CHEE-tah): little or young girl

				mujer (moo-HEHR): woman

				mundo (MOON-do): world

				muñeca (moo-NYEH-kah): doll

				músico (MOO-see-co): musician

				muy (MOO-ee): a lot, much

				nagual (NAH-goo-ahl): warlock

				nietecita (nee-eh-teh-SEE-tah): little granddaughter

				niña (NEE-nyah): little girl

				Niño Fidencio (NEE-nyo fee-DEHN-see-oh): a famous Mexican healer, a folk saint, unrecognized by the Catholic Church

				nopal (no-PAHL): cactus

				nuestro (noo-EHS-tro): our

				Nueva Rosita (noo-EH-vah rro-SEE-tah): A village in Coahuila, Mexico, along Hwy 57

				ojito (o-HEE-to): slang for a stream or creek

				Padre Nuestro (PAH-dreh noo-EHS-tro): Our Father, prayer

				pajarillo (pah-hah-REE-yo): little bird

				pájaro (PAH-hah-ro): bird

				paliza (pah-LEE-sah): beating

				paloma (pah-LO-mah): dove

				Pancho Villa (PAHN-cho VEE-yah): famous Mexican revolutionary who led the Northern division in Chihuahua during the Mexican Revolution

				Papá (pah-PAH): father

				para (PAH-rah): for

				pasar (pah-SAHR): to pass

				pequeña (peh-KEH-nyah): little

				Pérdido (PEHR-dee-do): a play on the pronunciation of the word perdido, meaning “lost”

				piojos (pee-OH-hos): lice, bugs

				pobrecita (po-breh-SEE-tah): poor little one

				poco (PO-co): little, not much

				pollo (PO-yo): chicken

				por favor (por fah-VOR): please

				preciosa (preh-see-OH-sah): precious

				pues (poo-ehs): well then

				puesticito (pos-teh-SEE-toh): little corner store

				purísima (poo-REE-see-mah): purest

				puro (POO-ro): pure, whole

				puros (POO-ros): only

				qué (keh): what

				¡qué diablos! (keh dee-AH-blos): slang, “What in the world!”

				¿qué pasa? (keh PAH-sah): What is going on?

				¿qué pasó? (keh pah-SO): What happened?

				quiere (kee-EH-reh): wants

				quiero (kee-EH-ro): (I) want

				quinceañera (keen-seh-NYEHR-ah): celebration of a girl’s fifteenth birthday, usually a large party, that is her formal social debut; a quinceañera is also a fifteen-year-old girl

				ranchito (rrahn-CHEE-to): little ranch

				raspa (RRAHS-pah): snowcone

				ratoncita (rah-ton-SEE-tah): little female mouse; slang term for “petty thief”

				remedios (rreh-MEH-dee-os): remedies

				revolución (rreh-vo-loo-see-ON): revolution

				rosada (rro-SAH-dah): pink

				rosas de castilla (RRO-sahs deh kahs-TEE-yah): roses of Castile, originally brought to the Americas from Castile, Spain, by missionaries and land grant owners during the Spanish conquest of Mexico; is now an iconic symbol of beauty and Mexican heritage

				rumor (roo-MOR): rumor

				Sabinas (sah-BEE-nahs): a city in Coahuila, Mexico, along Hwy 57

				sacrificio (sah-kree-FEE-see-oh): sacrifice

				sala (SAH-lah): living room, family room, or receiving room

				santísimo (sahn-TEE-see-mo): holy

				semillita (seh-mee-YEE-tah): little seed

				señora (seh-NYOH-rah): lady, married woman

				señorita (seh-nyoh-REE-tah): young lady; also a title given to an unmarried woman of any age

				serpiente (sehr-pee-EHN-teh): snake

				sí (see): yes

				sol (sol): sun

				sopapilla (so-pah-PEE-yah): puffy pastry treat made from flour tortilla pieces, fried and dusted with sweetened cinnamon or powdered sugar. It puffs up with hot air and is often served with honey on the side.

				sospechoso (sos-peh-CHO-so): suspicious-looking man

				su (soo): your

				tablas de Lotería (TAH-blahs deh lo-teh-REE-ah): individual game boards for Lotería, much like bingo cards

				taco (TAH-koh): often crisply fried tortilla folded over a variety of fillings such as seasoned meat, lettuce, tomatoes, and cheese

				tamal (tah-MAHL): a specialty dish made from a corn based dough, filled with spicy pork, meat, chicken, or other protein, wrapped in corn husks and broiled. Served as a main dish. Dessert tamales are filled with a combination of fruit and cheeses.

				taquito (tah-KEE-toh): smaller version of tacos, tortillas filled with meat, chicken, or any other breakfast or lunch protein and served as a main dish.

				tarada (tah-RAH-dah): brainless, dim-witted

				Tejano (teh-HAH-no): Texan, of or originating from Texas

				telaraña (teh-lah-RAH-nyah): spider web

				Tenochtitlan (teh-nosh-TEE-tlahn) [Nahuatl]: capital of the Aztec civilization, now the capital of Mexico, modern-day Mexico City

				tiene (tee-EH-neh): has

				tlacuache (tlah-coo-AH-cheh): possum

				tocar (to-CAHR): to play (instrument) or touch

				Tonantzin (to-NAHN-tzin): Aztec mother goddess

				torta (TOR-tah): pie

				tortilla (tor-TEE-yah): thin, round bread made with flour or cornmeal, rolled flat, and usually served hot with a filling or topping

				traidor (trah-ee-DOR): traitor

				tu (too): your

				tuna (TOO-nah): prickly pear, cactus fruit

				un (oon)/una (OO-nah): one

				vago (VAH-go): vagabond or wanderer, lazy person

				vámonos (VAH-mo-nos): let’s go

				velorio (veh-LO-ree-oh): viewing of a body before burial, accompanied by rosary prayers

				venadas (veh-NAH-dahs): deer

				verde (VEHR-deh): green

				virgen (VEER-hen): Virgin

				virgencita (veer-hen-SEE-tah): little virgin

				viuda (veh-OO-dah): widow

				y (ee): and

				ya (yah): all right

				yerbabuena [sometimes hierba] (yehr-bah-boo-EH-nah): a species of mint [spearmint], used in teas to sooth body aches or stomach cramps

				zopilote (so-pee-LO-teh): vulture





		 			 				ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



				 				 				First, I’d like to acknowledge my husband, Jim, who gets me as a writer, but always manages to keep it light. Once, when I apologized for having to write madly, passionately, and for long, exhausting periods of time, he said, “Baby, you are beyond obsessed — you are possessed, but I love you anyway!”

				On crazy writing nights, he puts up with the punching of the keys while he’s trying to sleep. On crazy writing days, he forgives me for not listening to everything he had to say and brings Diet Coke and tacos to my computer desk to keep the creative muse from starving or dehydrating me. On crazy weeks-long writing binges (like Christmas break), he stays out of the writing cave and fields all calls and lets me play in there all by myself without being bothered.

				Thank you for being my first reader, and looking at everything I write with a critical eye and a kind heart, and for believing in me and my work. Gracias, mi amor, for being a great father and soulmate, and for taking care of so much while I chase this dream.

				I’d also like to thank my editor at Tu Books, the talented Stacy Whitman, who fell in love with my girls and helped me tell their story honestly and with integrity while letting me be my poetic self. Thank you, Stacy, for being a fantastic editor, a great teacher not afraid to use a red pen, all the while asking a million valid questions and guiding me in absolutely the right path. You taught me so much in such a short amount of time — I am a better writer for it, and tremendously indebted to you.

				I’d like to also thank Isaac Stewart for creating a magical, gorgeous cover for Summer of the Mariposas. You are a genius!

				I can’t forget to thank my sisters, Alicia, Virginia, Diamantina, Angelica, y Roxana, for being themselves: sharing, arguing, caring, fighting, hugging — but always in the most sisterly way. Your love, courage, and sense of adventure inspired these characters — I am blessed to have you as mis cinco hermanitas.

				Once again, I’d also like to thank my McAuliffe family, my brothers and sisters in education, most especially my writing cheerleaders, and dearest friends: Veronica Huerta, Ceilia Bowles, Maria Ramirez, Rosalinda Casillas, Nina Huerta, Gabriela Sandoval, Gayle King, and Mayo and Amalia Caceres. Your encouraging words give me wings — thank you.





		 			 				ABOUT THE

AUTHOR



				 				 				Guadalupe Garcia McCall received the Pura Belpré Award for her debut YA novel, Under the Mesquite. She was born in Mexico and moved to Texas as a young girl, keeping close ties with family on both sides of the border. Trained in Theater Arts and English, she now teaches English/Language Arts at a junior high school. Her poems for adults have appeared in more than twenty literary journals. McCall lives with her husband and their three sons in the San Antonio, Texas, area. You can find her online at guadalupegarciamccall.com.





Loved Summer of the Mariposas? Don't miss Under the Mesquite, also by Guadalupe Garcia McCall.

When Lupita's mother falls sick with cancer, it is up to Lupita to keep her family together as she discovers what it means to grow up. Winner of the 2012 Pura Belpré Award and named one of the Top Ten Best Fiction for Young Adults by the American Library Association.

Read on for an excerpt of Under the Mesquite.





chismosa


	 				I thought I was being clever

				by sitting just outside the kitchen window,

				but I was wrong.

				“¡Chismosa!” Mami chastises me

				when she catches me eavesdropping

				on her and her comadres.

				Then she orders me to go scrub

				the bathrooms, toilets and all.

				After her friends leave,

				Mami calls me into her and Papi’s room.

				“You embarrassed me today,”

				she says, sitting on the edge of the bed

				with her arms folded.

				I sit down cautiously beside her.

				“Secretos should not be kept

				from the oldest daughter,” I tell her.

				“You may be the eldest, Lupita,

				but there are some things

				you are too young to understand,”

				she says firmly, her face still angry—

				disappointed.

				“I know I shouldn’t have

				been listening,” I admit.

				“But I’ve been worried about you.

				Mami, I’m good for more than

				changing diapers and putting little ones

				to sleep. I can bear up when things

				go wrong. You’re the one

				who raised me to be that way.”

				Mami puts her arms around me.

				Then she kisses my temple

				and rocks me back and forth

				as if I were a baby.

				But I haven’t been her baby

				in fourteen years.

				“It’s okay,” I whisper

				against her cheek. “I know.”

				My heart aches

				because I have heard the word

				that she keeps tucked away

				behind closed doors.

				“What do you know?” Mami asks.

				We lock eyes,

				and she knows I know.

				“Don’t tell the others,” she begs,

				and I hold her while she cries it out.



Read more in Under the Mesquite by Guadalupe Garcia McCall! Available in print and e-book. leeandlow.com




