
mis lindas mariposas.”

				THE TREE: “Under a tree rest my

beautiful butterflies.”



				 				 				 				 				 				We’d wanted to stay at a motel, but Inés and her family insisted on boarding us for the night. In the small kitchen at the back of the house, we ate traditional birthday fare. Inés and her mother served us plateful after plateful of enchiladas de mole. The chocolaty sauce of the chicken enchiladas spilled out of the rolled-up tortillas and mixed in with the rice and beans, making the dish extra delicious. We gorged ourselves till we thought we’d pop. Then for dessert the women brought us generously cut slices of pearly white cake. It was moist and creamy and absolutely too much for our already bursting stomachs, but it was scrumptious. So we had two slices each.

				During the meal, however, the Spanish Inquisition began. We had to think of some quick answers because even though we’d expected a full-on interrogation, we hadn’t planned anything that came out of our mouths.

				Luckily, the girls remembered our little talk about having Juanita and I “explain” things without giving out too much information. For the most part, they remained silent and didn’t contradict or add anything to whatever we said.

				“But where is your Mamá?” Inés’s mother asked as she passed out the frothy white cake slices.

				“She’s at home,” I said, putting a forkful of cake in my mouth to stop myself from having to give out any more details than were absolutely necessary. Our number one rule about answering inopportune questions from strangers was “don’t add too much cream to the tacos.” In other words, keep the answers simple and plain. Like Mamá always says, nobody needs to know all of our business.

				“At home?” Inés’s mother crinkled her eyebrows together, and I concentrated on my next bite of cake.

				“Working,” Delia said, acting nonchalant. “She’s married to her job. She hasn’t been able to take a vacation in years.”

				“So who takes care of you?” Inés asked, turning her attention to Delia. “Who drove you here?”

				“I did. I’m old enough,” I said, quickly jumping in before anybody else said anything too outrageous.

				“Sí, of course.” Her eyes said she didn’t believe me.

				“And how old are you?” Inés’s mother asked. “You don’t look older than fourteen.”

				“I’m actually eighteen,” I said, concentrating on my cake again. “The women in my family look younger than we actually are. We take after my grandmother. She’s seventy-one years old, but she doesn’t look a day over fifty.” Not that I’d seen my abuela since I was ten, but it was the only justification I could think of.

				“I see,” Inés said, looking to her mother again. “And where does your abuela live?”

				I yawned and stretched and made a show of being ready for bed. “Not too far from here,” I mumbled.

				“Really?” Inés’s face changed then. She looked more interested, more alert, like a squirrel when she lifts herself on her hind legs and sniffs the air with instinctual intelligence.

				“Yes. We’ll be seeing her in the morning,” I said without really knowing why. Maybe it was nervousness that made me say it, or maybe the decision had already been made and it had just been sitting there in my mind, in my heart, waiting to be put into words. I didn’t understand how or why, but somewhere between the enchiladas and the birthday cake I’d decided to honor La Llorona’s request, to run the course of our journey and try to find true happiness for my sisters and myself. And that meant going to visit Abuelita. It seemed to me that we had been through too much to not finish what we’d started.

				Around the small round table, every one of my sisters stopped eating, stared, and then smiled at me. Their joy was evident in the way they nodded and grinned while they resumed shoving cake into their mouths with reckless abandon.

				Zaragoza made her way around in the tight little kitchen to sit between me and Inés. “Oh?”

				“Yes,” I said, thinking on my feet. “Mamá told her about the body we found and she wanted to help. After they talked it over, Abuelita told us how to get here. It was really very easy.”

				“Super easy,” Delia interjected, shoving another forkful of cake in her mouth.

				“Well, we should call them and thank them. Let them know you arrived safely. We don’t want either of them to worry,” Inés’s mother said.

				“She doesn’t have a phone,” Velia said, joining the conversation with the same conviction as Delia and I. “I mean, my mother does, but . . . ”

				“What she means is that our mother doesn’t answer her cell phone at work, and she’s on the night shift right now,” I interrupted, coming to Velia’s rescue. She was always the worst at keeping things from strangers. She was just too candid. “It will be all right,” I continued. “We’ll call them tomorrow, after Mamá gets home from work and Abuelita is awake.”

				“I think we should try to get in touch with someone tonight,” Inés insisted. “Don’t you, Mamá?”

				“No!” I said emphatically, hoping they would listen to us.

				“Why not?” Inés asked.

				“Because . . . because . . .” I tried to think of something else to say, something totally convincing, but nothing came to mind. I started to panic, and I realized I was holding my breath. Then, remembering La Llorona’s words and the effect the ear pendant had on the duty officer at customs, I reached up to my left ear and flicked my index finger against the nestling orbs. They tinkled lightly and I could feel them twirling around each other, humming against my cheek. I turned my face slightly toward Inés and her mother to call attention to the spinning argollas, as I whispered the enchantment. “Aztec queen, Tonantzin, Holy Mother of all mankind, give us your magical assistance. Make these women believe and help us leave!”

				“What is going on?” Juanita leaned close to me to look at my whirling ear pendant. The rest of the girls did the same from around the table. “Why is your earring spinning? And what was that you said?” She reached over to touch La Llorona’s magical gift.

				“Don’t touch it,” I whispered. “It’s a prop to help me hypnotize them.”

				“Since when do you know how to hypnotize people?” Delia asked, a frown of disbelief furrowing between her brows.

				“Who cares? It’s working,” Juanita said, putting a finger over her lips. “Look at their eyes. They look like cats.”

				“I like your earrings,” Zaragoza said, reaching for them. “They look very old, like something the ancient Aztecas used to wear.”

				“They were a gift,” I said, trying not to deviate too far from the original lie I’d told the border patrol agent early that morning.

				Zaragoza took another sip from her coffee. “Oh, who gave them to you?”

				“Abuelita Remedios,” I lied, relieved to see that the women had dropped their concerns. “She’s very generous.”

				 “Of course.” Inés’s pupils were perfectly dilated, giving her a dazed expression. Her mother’s pupils were dilated too. The spell was working. “I’m glad you’re going to a relative’s house. It’s not safe for you girls to be traveling in Mexico alone.”

				I kept my voice even, willing the spell to keep them charmed by our lies for as long as we remained in their house. “Well, like I said, our grandmother lives down the road, about twenty miles away, between here and Ejido la Paloma. This was more like a quick stop along the way.”

				It wasn’t a total lie either. Hacienda Dorada was technically located somewhere in the wilderness between El Sacrificio and Ejido la Paloma. There were a series of unmarked roads that led to Hacienda Dorada from El Sacrificio. Papá had outlined them on his road map when I was ten years old, to show me where we were going the last time we visited Abuelita Remedios. Juanita had looked it up while I was driving earlier today.

				“So, you’re going to visit your grandmother. That’s nice. I bet you’re excited about that,” Inés’s mother exclaimed. She smiled at Pita, who was shoveling cake into her mouth without saying a word. Pita was all bug-eyed and big-eared, nodding like a ratoncita, nervous as a little mouse sitting precariously on the edge of a wooden trap.

				By the time we were done eating and answering questions, it was almost midnight. We sat at the table yawning in front of our hostesses, who were cleaning up after the party. When they saw us practically falling out of our chairs, Inés insisted that we follow her down the hall.

				“First, we’ll get you all cleaned up,” Inés began. “You can take turns showering. Your little sister can go first. I suggest you don’t take longer than five minutes each. Otherwise you’ll run out of hot water.”

				“Oh, we don’t want to use up all your water,” I said, feeling more and more like we should just get out of the house, maybe go find a cheap motel room in the nearest town.

				“Well, let’s not worry about that,” Inés said, as she put her arm around my shoulders and walked me back down the hall. “The water will be warm again in the morning.”

				Half an hour later, Delia was busy combing out Pita’s wet hair. Pita looked refreshed with their hair slicked back. The twins looked revitalized too. Their hair was still wrapped in thick towels, and they were wearing their long shirts from home. Their legs were long and slim, and I wondered why they weren’t cursed with the big-boned frames Juanita and I had inherited from Mamá.

				“Are you almost done in there?” I called to Juanita, who was obviously taking her time in the shower. I was dying to scrub the grit off my arms and face. “I’m so dirty, you could take a spatula and scrape the filth off my skin.”

				“You’re telling me,” Delia said, looking at me with disgust. “You smell like a chiva.”

				“Thanks.” I lowered the toilet lid and plopped down on it, upset at the idea of smelling like a billy goat. “I love being one of your analogies.”

				“It’s a simile. I didn’t say you were a goat, I said you smell like a goat. Didn’t you learn anything in English class?” Delia pulled the towel off her head and started finger-combing her hair absently.

				Delia pushed Pita toward the door. “I’m outta here. Let’s go to bed, Papita Frita. Looks like we’re sharing piojos tonight.”

				“Stop calling me that!” Pita pulled away from Delia and grabbed the side of the sink to anchor herself. “I’m not sleeping with you. You’re mean!”

				“Suit yourself, but there’s only one bed, and I’m calling the left side.”

				“There’s only one bed?” I asked, watching Velia pull her right eyelid down to check her eyes in front of the mirror.

				“Yup,” Velia said. She opened her mouth and stuck her tongue out to look at it. “I’m sleeping on the window sofa. Inés said I could. It’s just long enough for one person, if I curl up real tight. Besides, I’m too tired to share a bed with Pita. She kicks like a wild horse.”

				“I know,” Juanita chimed in from behind the shower curtain she was using to cover up while she dressed for bed. “I’m taking the blankets out of the car and sleeping on the floor.”

				“On the floor?” I asked, mortified. My back ached just thinking about it.

				“It’s better than being all crunched up in that bed with the three of you.”

				“I guess the floor’s not so bad,” I admitted. “I mean, compared to having Pita punching and kicking at you all night long.”

				 “Do whatever you want. Shower’s all yours,” Juanita said. Then she pushed back the curtain and stepped out of the bathtub in her pink pajamas — she had dressed in the shower because she was much more modest than the rest of us.

				“There’s probably enough room for three of us on the bed,” I said hopefully.

				I couldn’t have been more wrong. By the time I got out of the shower and dressed, Delia and Pita were asleep, fully stretched out on what would have been my side of the bed. Delia was awake, but just barely. I tried to shake her, so she could give me some room, but she moaned something that sounded like, “Lotería!”

				“Odilia, it’s not very comfortable, but you can sleep down here with me,” Juanita whispered from her place on the floor by the window seat. “Velia and I are awake.”

				“I wish we had more cushion down here. Why didn’t you take the comforter from the bed?” I asked.

				“Delia called it, and she wouldn’t give it up. But that’s okay. I have my San Marcos blanket. It’s not so bad. You’ll get used to it.”

				Suddenly angry, I grabbed the edge of the comforter and yanked it off of the girls on the bed, leaving them with only the thin blanket underneath. Pita whined out an incoherent sound, and I smiled as I walked away with it without feeling even a little bit guilty. They were lucky I didn’t push them off the side of the bed — selfish brats.

				“So what’s the plan for tomorrow? When do you want to take off?” Juanita asked in the darkness. I settled in beside her on the floor by the window seat, and we snuggled under the comforter together.

				“I don’t know what time the family is going to wake up.” I took a deep breath and let it out slowly. “But we should hit the road as soon as the sun comes up. This whole thing has gotten too complicated for my peace of mind.”

				“I know,” Juanita said. “Today didn’t turn out the way we pictured it at all, did it?”

				Velia turned over on the window seat to face us in the dark. “Who would’ve thought this guy had abandoned his family?” she said, joining our conversation. “He looked so happy in the picture. I thought for sure they’d be waiting for him.”

				“Nothing’s ever the way it seems, is it? I mean, look at Papá,” Juanita whispered at no one in particular. She sounded distant, sad.

				I hated hearing the pain in their voices when my sisters remembered our missing father. “Let’s not talk about him,” I said.

				“Okay. But I’m very disappointed,” Velia continued. “I thought for sure this guy was different. I thought he cared about his family.”

				“I thought they’d be happy to see him, and us.” Juanita pulled the comforter up and covered half her face with it. The thought of Papá had made us all gloomy again despite the refreshing showers.

				“You’re telling me,” Velia whispered. “I thought we’d be heroes. Instead, I feel like the grim reaper. You were right, Odilia. We should have left well enough alone.”

				I turned away from Juanita and settled into a comfortable position on the floor. “Well, what’s done is done. No use lamenting it. Let’s get some sleep,” I said, yawning. If I had been more like Juanita, I might have said, “I told you so,” though.

				“Odilia, are we really going to see Abuelita tomorrow?” Velia’s voice was quiet from her spot on the window seat, as if she was afraid to ask the question. “Please say yes,” she whispered.

				“Yes,” I said, and to my surprise the rest of the girls on the bed sat up and hollered with happiness.

				“Yay! Yay!” they hollered. I shushed them and reminded them we weren’t at home.

				“People are mourning here,” I chastised them. “Now settle down and go to sleep before I change my mind.”

				After the girls fell asleep, I lay awake for some time listening to their soft breathing, thinking about going to Abuelita’s house and what might happen once we got to Hacienda Dorada. There were so many scenarios running through my mind, I was completely overwhelmed by them. Would Papá be there? And, if he wasn’t, would Abuelita know where he was? Would she even recognize us?

				The truth was, I didn’t know what to expect. After the day we’d just had, I realized we had no way of knowing what tomorrow would bring. What if Abuelita wasn’t home? How could I keep the girls from getting their hearts broken if she didn’t even live there anymore? Worse yet, what if she had passed away and nobody had bothered telling us?

				I went to bed feeling utterly conflicted and, for the first time in years, I was scared for us. But even as bad as I felt that night, it was nothing compared to the shock I received the next morning.

				It all started well enough, with us waking up to the aroma of homemade flour tortillas wafting through the house. As we rolled out of our makeshift bed and looked around the sunlit room, we found our clothes washed, neatly pressed, and laid out for us. We scrambled into them gratefully, and as we entered the kitchen, our hostess turned to smile at us.

				“Good morning, señoritas,” Inés said, her smile curling over her lips and creasing the corners of her eyes. “Would you like some breakfast? I can make some chilaquiles. It will only take a second.”

				“That would be amazing,” Velia and Delia sang out, simultaneously, even as they scrambled into the nearest chair.

				“Odilia, would you do me a favor?” Inés asked, as she turned on the stove and put a black iron skillet over the bright blue flame. “Can you please run down to the puestecito at the corner and get me today’s paper? Just tell Don José to put it on my tab.”

				“Sure,” I said. But as I left the house, I told myself I should be quick with the errand. We really needed to get out of El Sacrificio before the spell was broken and someone decided to call the authorities.

				At the store, I picked up some chips and sodas for the road, walked up to the counter, and laid everything down in front of the cashier. The newspaper fell open before me, and I froze as I read the headline over the top of the front page.

				 				¡DESAPARECIDAS!

				The one word said it all: MISSING. Plastered across the width of the paper was a giant picture of us — my sisters and I huddled together under last year’s scrappy little Christmas tree, happy as mariposas, our bright smiles belying our alleged situation.

				We were officially missing children.




