c("", "Demystifying the Adolescent Brain", "by Laurence Steinberg", "Adolescents can be mature one moment and frustratingly immature the next.", "The nature of brain development helps explain why.", "In addition to being a transitional time in physical, intellectual, emotional, and social development,", "adolescence is a time ofimportant changes in the structure and function of the brain. Scientists are beginning", "to understand how the psychological changes of adolescence are linked to brain maturation.", 
"2", "Before the development of brain imaging technology, scientists could only specula~e about the workings", "of the adolescent brain. Now, however, with the same scanners that are used to identify tumors and torn", "ligaments, researchers can see inside the adolescent's brain and watch what happens when teenagers think.", "We now know that, other than the first three years of life, no period of development is characterized by more", "dramatic brain changes than adolescence.", "WHAT WE'VE LEARNED FROM FMRI", 
"It used to be thought that improved intellectual", "In addition, greater interconnectedness", "among various regions of the brain allows for", "better communication between parts associated", "with different functions. For example, connections", "between regions of the brain responsible for logical", "reasoning become better connected with those", "or volume.", "Since 2000, there's been an explosion in", "research on adolescent brain development, and", "our understanding of brain maturation has grown", 
"at breathtaking speed. Major contributions to", "You may have had an MRI exam to diagnose", "the underlying cause of some sort of pain.", "Although the technology used in this sort of", "imaging is the same as that used by neuroscientists", "of individuals' brains and compare anatomy (brain", "C", "refers to the use of the test to examine how", "the brain functions, and not just its anatomy. 5", "Researchers use fMRI to examine patterns of brain", "adolescence are reflected in changes in brain", 
"structure (for instance, certain parts of the", "brain are relatively smaller in childhood than in", "adolescence, whereas other parts are relatively", "larger). Other aspects of brain development are", "reflected in changes in brain function (for instance,", "adolescents may use different parts of the brain", "than children do when performing the same task).", "134", "", "watching them, and whether the ways in which the", "presence of friends changes brain activity differs", "between teenagers and adults. We've found that", 
"the mere presence of peers activates adolescents'", "reward centers-but not those of adults. This may", "make teenagers more inclined to take risks when 8", "they're with their friends because they're more", "likely to focus on the rewards of a risky choice than", "on the potential costs.", "Synapse Formation", "However, soon after birth, unused and unnecessary 9", "synapses start to be eliminated, a process called", "synaptic pruning. As a general rule, we tend to", "assume that \"more is better,\" but that's not the case", 
"here. Imagine a meadow between two patches of", "forest. Hundreds of lightly trodden paths connect", "one side to the other Ithe unpruned brain). Over", "time, people discover that one path is more direct", "than others. More people begin using this path", "more often, so it becomes wider and deeper.", "Because the other paths are not used anymore, the", "grass grows back and those paths disappear. That's", "what synaptic pruning is like.", "this process of electrical transmission is involved.", 
"The elimination of synapses continues", "A key process in early brain development", "is the development of connections-synapses-", "between neurons. By age 2, a single neuron may", "have 10,000 connections to other neurons.", "The formation of some synapses is genetically", "programmed, but others are formed through", "experience. The rate of synapse formation peaks", "at about age 1 and slows down in early childhood,", "but the development of new synapses continues", "13", "memories, acquire knowledge, and adapt to", 
"changing circumstances.", "by a period of decline Iwhen more and more", "synapses are pruned). Although synaptic pruning", "Initially, the brain produces many more", "connections among cells than it will use. The", "number of synapses in the brain of a l-year-old", "Unit 7e: Brain Science", "WHAT THIS MEANS FOR THE ADOLESCENT BRAIN", "Myelin, which acts like plastic insulation", "around an electrical wire, increases the speed of", "neural impulses and so improves information", "c'", "Myelination", 
"into adulthood. As with synaptic pruning,", "14", "examining where myelination occurs most", "of development, white fatty tissue called", "e;:,", "provides clues about the aspects of cognitive", "functioning that are changing most at that stage.", "c", "C", "More Advanced Reasoning ...", "C:-", "15", "emotional and social information, such as reading", "through synaptic pruning and myelination in", "C", "of the brain to be pruned in adolescence is the", "c:", "C',", "behind your forehead, which is most important", 
"for sophisticated thinking abilities, such as", "planning, thinking ahead, and weighing risks", "maturing in ways that enable teenagers to become", "and rewards. There's also continued myelination", "c", "changing in ways that make them do risky things.", "other parts of the brain throughout adolescence,", "18", "c", "passionate kiss felt? How much you loved the", "emotions and coordinate our thoughts and", "How hard you laughed with your high school", "feelings. Maturation of the prefrontal cortex is not", 
"c", "adolescence. Scientists now understand why.", "development than scientists had once thought.", "A chemical substance in the brain called", "16", "dopamine is responsible for the feeling of", "changes in the functioning of the prefrontal cortex", "C", "we experience what some scientists have called a", "C", "For instance, in experiments in which participants", "pleasure. It makes us want whatever elicited the", "and asked to push a button when a certain image", "C'", "so strong.\\Some stimuli produce so much pleasure", 
"that we get a dopamine squirt just anticipating the", "C.", "than children to activate prefrontal regions that", "are not relevant to performing the task well. In", "We now know there's a rapid increase in", "dopamine activity in early adolescence-in fact,", "mUltiple parts of the brain simultaneously and", "C", "reward center in early adolescence than at any", "other areas of the brain, such as the limbic system,", "136", "", "pleasurable during early adolescence, young", "adolescents go out of their way to seek rewarding", 
"experiences. At all ages we seek out things that", "make us feel good, of course. But the drive to do", "this is much more intense in early adolescence", "This combination of advanced (but not", "yet totally mature) reasoning and heightened 21", "sensation-seeking explains why otherwise", "intelligent adolescents often do surprisingly", "foolish things. More important, the fact that", "teenagers' ability to control their impulses is", "immature at the same time that their interest in", "sensation seeking is stronger than ever makes", 
"them vulnerable to making mistakes. Early", "adolescence is like starting a car without having a", "skilled driver behind the wheel.", "23", "25", "the structure and function of the brain change", "during adolescence, the implications of these", "changes for adolescent development are still the", "subject of a great deal of ongoing research and", "considerable speculation. I'm often asked when", "adolescents begin to think like adults. This is", "hard to answer on the basis of brain science alone", 
"because it depends on which aspects of thinking", "you're concerned about.", "average adult. But research on brain maturation", "indicates that relatively more sophisticated", "Psychologists draw a distinction between \"cold\"", "cognition (when we think about something that", "doesn't have much emotional content, like how", "to solve an algebra problem) and \"hot\" cognition", "The Need to Practice Autonomy", "like whether to go joyriding with friends or throw", "It's important to keep in mind that the brain is very", 
"malleable, or \"plastic,\" and that its development", "is affected by experience as well as biology. Both", "synaptic pruning and myelination are influenced", "by experience, such that repeated activation", "of a specific collection of neurons as a result of", "engaging in a particular behavior will actually", "strengthen the connections among those neurons,", "which, in turn, will make them function more", "137 ", "efficiently. This is one reason that practicing the", "same task over and over again makes that task", 
"easier to perform each time.", "autonomy, we need to respond by gradually", "Although research on brain plasticity during", "adolescence is just in its infancy, many scientists", "believe that the maturation of the brain systems", "responsible for thinking ahead and controlling", "impulses is influenced by the sorts of experiences", "28", "in the classroom. Given the well-documented", "finding that practicing something will strengthen", "the brain circuits that control that behavior,", "it's important that, as educators, we provide", 
"adolescents with opportunities to practice things", "like planning, anticipating the consequences of", "138", "3", "6", "functioning in adolescence would be reflected in", "larger brain size. However, the brain has reached", "its adult size by age 10, making it impossible", "that changes in thinking during adolescence are", "the result of sheer increases in the brain's size", "responsible for experiencing intense emotions;", "\"cross-talk\" between these regions enables better 4", "impulse control and self-regulation. That's one", 
"reason that older teenagers are so much better than", "younger ones at controlling their emotions.", "7", "our understanding have come from studies using", "functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).", "This technique enables researchers to take pictures", "C", "who study brain development, the \"f\" in fMRI", "structure) and activity (brain function).", "C", "Some aspects of brain development in", "C", "activity while individuals perform a specific task", "(for example, recalling a list of words, viewing", 
"photos of one's friends, or listening to music).", "Participants in an fMRI study are asked to perform", "tasks on a computer while they lie inside a brain", "scanner. With this setup, it's possible to study", "both how patterns of brain activity differ during", "different tasks (for example, when we actively read", "Unit 7e: Brain Science ", "as opposed to being read to) and whether people", "of different ages show different patterns of brain", "activity while performing the same task. Many of", 
"the most important brain changes that take place", "during adolescence are not in the brain's structure,", "but in how the brain works.", "At Temple University, we're studying how", "patterns of brain activity vary when individuals", "perform tasks either alone or with their friends", "A PRIMER ON BRAIN MATURATION", "is about twice the number in the adult brain.", "The human brain contains approximately 100", "billion neurons, cells that carry information by", "transmitting electrical charges within the brain", 
"by means of chemicals called neurotransmitters.", "Neurons do not actually touch; there's a miniscule", "gap between them called a synapse. When the", "electrical charge travels through a neuron, it", "stimulates the release of neurotransmitters,", "chemicals that carry the signal across the synapse", "from one neuron to the next. Anytime we", "perceive something Ifor example, feel an itch);", "move something Iscratch the itch); or process", "information Iwonder where the itch came from),", "12", 
"through adolescence and is normal and necessary 10", "to development and functioning. Just as pruning", "a rose bush-cutting off weak and misshapen", "branches-produces a healthier plant with", "larger flowers, so synaptic pruning enhances", "the brain's functioning. It makes the brain more", "efficient by transforming an unwieldy network of", "small pathways into a better organized system of", "superhighways.", "throughout life as we learn new skills, build", "In general, the development of synapses", 
"is characterized by a period of growth Iwhen", "more and more synapses are created) followed", "Synaptic Pruning", "takes place throughout infancy, childhood, and 11", "adolescence, different regions of the brain are", "pruned at different points in development. As a", "rule, the brain regions in which pruning is taking", "135 ", "place at a particular point in development are the", "regions associated with the greatest changes in", "cognitive functioning during that stage.", "transmission. Myelination occurs in waves,", 
"C;.", "beginning in the prenatal period and continuing", "c. .", "Initially, neurons are \"nude,\" but in the course", "c. .", "dramatically at a particular point in development", "myelin encases the projections of neurons that", "interconnect them, a process called myelination.", "c", "WHAT THIS MEANS FOR THE ADOLESCENT BRAIN", "C:~", "a region that's important for our experience", "of reward and punishment and for processing", "During adolescence, the brain is remodeled", "c-", "someone's facial expression or judging what a", 
"particular brain regions. The most important part", "person thinks of us.", "prefrontal cortex, the region ofthe brain directly", "But More Risk Taking", "c.,", "At the same time that the adolescent brain is", "17", "e,", "more capable of reasoned thinking, it's also", "of the prefrontal cortex and its connections to", "c", "which leads to many cognitive advances, including", "Do you remember how good your first", "improvements in our ability to regulate our", "c", "music that was popular when you were a teenager?", 
"c", "friends? Things that feel good feel better during", "complete until the mid-zos, a much later point in", "C.", "19", "C", "Imaging studies have also shown important", "C", "pleasure. When something enjoyable happens,", "in adolescence. Patterns of activation within the", "prefrontal cortex typically become more focused.", "\"dopamine squirt,\" which leads to the sensation of", "C", "are presented with a rapid succession of images", "squirt because the feeling of pleasure it produces is", "appears but refrain from pushing it when a", 
"C·", "different image appears, adolescents are less likely", "experience. )", "C", "20", "addition, individuals become more likely to use", "C", "there's more dopamine activity in the brain's", "coordinate activity among prefrontal regions and", "C", "other time oflife. Because things feel especially", "Unit 7C: Brain Science ", "WHAT THIS MEANS FOR ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOR", "that thoughts about a speeding ticket (or worse),", "an unwanted pregnancy, or being grounded for", "coming home smelling of beer may not even make", 
"it onto their radar screen.", "22", "than before or after.", "The urge to seek out rewarding and", "pleasurable experiences is a mixed blessing. On", "the plus side, it's part of what makes it so much", "fun to be a teenager. But sometimes this drive is", "so intense that adolescents can exhibit a sort of", "reward tunnel vision. They're so driven to seek", "pleasure that they may not pay attention to the", "associated risks . To teenagers, driving fast, having", "unprotected sex, and drinking alcohol feel so good", 
"WHAT THIS MEANS FOR ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOR", "Although scientists agree about the ways in which", "Teachers sometimes are surprised by the", "inconsistency in students' behavior, especially", "during the middle school years. Understanding", "the nature of brain development in adolescence", "helps explain why adolescents can vacillate so", "often between mature and immature behavior.", "When it comes to more basic abilities, such as", "those involving memory, attention, and logical", "reasoning, especially under optimal conditions,", 
"the average ls-year-old is just as mature as the", "Both Mature and Immature", "cognitive abilities, such as thinking ahead, 24", "envisioning the consequences of a decision,", "balancing risks and rewards, or controlling", "impulses, are still developing at that age.", "(when we think about something that can make", "us feel exuberant or excited, angry or depressed,", "26", "a punch at someone who insulted a girlfriend). The", "systems of the brain responsible for cold cognition", "are mature by the time most individuals are 16.", 
"But the systems that control hot cognition aren't-", "they're still developing well into the 20S. That's", "why teenagers who get straight As in algebra", "can also do really dumb things when out with", "their buddies.", "Unit 7C: Brain Science", "WHAT THIS MEANS FOR ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOR", "a decision, and regulating their own behavior.", "Although it can be frustrating to teachers and", "parents when young adolescents push for more", "27", "granting them more control. Assignments that", "require teenagers to think ahead, make a plan, and", 
"carry it out may stimulate the maturation of brain", "systems that enable more mature self-regulation.", "young people have, including their experiences", "Initially, adolescents who haven't been given", "many opportunities to develop these capabilities", "may not always succeed. But be patient. Over", "time, with practice, as synapses are pruned and", "neural circuits myelinated, adolescents' ability to", "exercise mature control over their own behavior", "will improve.", "Unit 7C: Brain Science "
)
