                                  Phineas Gage: A Gruesome but
                                  True Story about Brain Science
                                                    by John Fleischman



                                          "HORRIBLE ACCIDENT" IN VERMONT

     1          The most unlucky/lucky moment in the life of Phineas Gage is only a minute or two away. It's
                almost four-thirty in the afternoon on September 13, 1848. Phineas is the foreman of a track
                construction gang that is in the process of blasting a railroad right-of-way through granite
                bedrock near the small town of Cavendish, Vermont. Phineas is twenty-six years old, unmarried,
                and five feet, six inches tall, short for our time but about average for his. He is good with his
                hands and good with his men, "possessing an iron will as well as an iron frame, " according to his
                doctor. In a moment, Phineas will have a horrible accident.
     2                   It will kill him, but it will take another eleven years, six months, and nineteen days to do
                so. In the short run, Phineas will make a full recovery, or so it will seem to those who didn't know
                him before. Old friends and family will know the truth. Phineas will never be his old self again.
                His "character" will change. The ways in which he deals with others, conducts himself, and
                makes plans will all change. Long after the accident, his doctor will sum up his case for a medical
                journal. "Gage," his doctor will write, "was no longer Gage. " Phineas Gage's accident will make
                him world famous, but fame will do him little good. Yet for many others-psychologists, medical
                researchers, doctors, and especially those who suffer brain injuries-Phineas Gage will become
                someone worth knowing.
     3                   That's why we know so much about Phineas. It's been 150 years since his accident, yet we
                are still learning more about him. There's also a lot about Phineas we don't know and probably
                never will. The biggest question is the simplest one and the hardest to answer: Was Phineas
                lucky or unlucky? Once you hear his story, you can decide for yourself. But right now, Phineas is
                working on the railroad and his time has nearly come.
     4                   Building a railroad in 1848 is muscle work. There are no bulldozers or power shovels
                to open a way through Vermont's Green Mountains for the Rutland & Burlington Railroad.
                Phineas's men work with picks, shovels, and rock drills. Phineas's special skill is blasting. With
                well-placed charges of black gunpowder, he shatters rock. To set those charges, he carries the
                special tool of the blasting trade, his "tamping iron. Some people confuse a tamping iron with a
                crowbar, but they are different tools for different jobs. A crowbar is for lifting up or prying apart
                something heavy. A tamping iron is for the delicate job of setting explosives. Phineas had his
                tamping iron made to order by a neighborhood blacksmith. It's a tapering iron rod that is three
                feet, seven inches long and weighs thirteen and a half pounds. It looks like an iron spear. At the
                base, it's fat and round, an inch and tllIee quarters in diameter. The fat end is for tamping-
                packing down- loose powder. The other end comes to a sharp, narrow point and is for poking
                holes through the gunpowder to set the fuse. Phineas's tamping iron is very smooth to the touch,
                smooth from the blacksmith's forge as well as from constant use


       5        His task is to blast the solid rock into pieces small enough for his crew to dig loose with
                 hand tools and haul away in ox carts. The flrst step is to drill a hole in the bedrock at exactly the
          	right angle and depth, or the explosion will be wasted. All day, Phineas must keep an eye on his
          	drillers to make sure they stay ahead. All day, Phineas must keep an eye on his diggers to make
          	 sure they keep up. All the time between, Phineas and his assistant are working with touchy  
           explosives.
                
      6    They fo llow a strict routine. His assistant "charges" each new hole by filling the bottom
         with coarse-grained gunpowder. Phineas uses the narrow end of his iron to carefully press the
         ropelike fuse down into the powder. The assistant then fills up the rest afthe hole with loose sand
         to act as a plug. Phineas will tamp the sand tight to bottle up the explosion, channeling the blast
           downward into the rock to shatter it. While his assistant is pouring the sand, Phineas flips his
         tamping iron around from the pointy end to the round end for tamping. Black powder is ticklish
         stuff. When it's damp, nothing will set it off. When it's too dry or mixed in the wrong formu la,
         almost anything can set it off, without warning. But Phineas and his assistant have done this
         a thousand times-pour the powder, set the fuse, pour the sand, tamp the sand plug, shout a
         warning, light the fuse, and run like mad.
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                   This is the face of the man with a hole in his head. It's a plaster life mask of Phineas Gage made in Boston after his       
               accident, and it shows exactly what the "recovered" Phineas looked like a year after his accident. He was twenty-seven.          
                  Notice the big scar on his forehead . To see what lies beneath the scar, compare this to the picture of his skull in the      
                  chapter "Following Phineas Gage." Photograph by Doug Mindel!; life ma sk courtesy of the Warren Anatomical Museum, Countway
                                                                                                                                                
                                                           Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School
                                                                                                                                                


           7           But something goes wrong this time. The sand is never poured down the hole; the black
              powder and fuse sit exposed at the bottom. Does his assistant forget, or does Phineas forget to
               look? Witnesses disagree. A few yards behind Phineas, a group of his men are using a hand-
                  cranked derrick crane to hoist a large piece of rock. Some of the men remember seeing Phineas

                  standing over the blast hole, leaning lightly on the tamping iron. Others say Phineas was sitting
            on a rock ledge above the hole, holding the iron loosely between his knees .
            
8           There is no argument about what happens next. Something or someone distracts
                Phineas. Does he hear his name called? Does he spot someone goofing off? Whatever the reason,
              Phineas turns his head to glance over his right shoulder. The fat end of his tamping iron slips
                 down into the hole and strikes the granite. A spark flies onto the exposed blasting powder. Blam!
              The drill hole acts as a gun barrel. Instead of a bullet, it fires Phineas's rod straight upward. The

                  iron shrieks through the air and comes down with a loud clang about thirty feet away .
            
9           This is what happens. Imagine you are inside Phineas's head, watching in extreme slow
           motion: See the pointy end of the rod enter under his left cheekbone, pass behind his left eye,
       through the front of his brain, and out the middle of his forehead just above the hairline. It takes

                  a fraction of a fraction of a second for the iron rod to pass from cheekbone to forehead, through
                  and through .
    
                                                                                     
         Lucky or unlucky, the sharp a ngle of the tamping iron made all the difference to Phineas. It entered just under his left
                                                                                                                                     
          cheekbone, passed behind his left. eyeball, and continued on upward through his frontal lobes. It exited his forehead
             between the two hemispheres of the cortex. The iron's passage left him alive and conscious but forever changed.
                                                                                                                                     
                                                         IIIustratiOIl by Jerry Ma/alle



      10            Amazingly, Phineas is still alive. The iron throws him flat on his back, but as his men
        come running through the gunpowder smoke, he sits up. A minute later, he speaks. Blood is
              pouring down his face from his forehead, but Phineas is talking about the explosion. His men

              insist on carrying him to an ox cart for the short ride into town. They gently lift him into the back

              of the cart so he can sit up with his legs out before him on the floor. An Irish workman grabs
           a horse and races ahead for the doctor while the ox cart ambulance rumbles slowly down the
           half-mile to Cavendish. Phineas's excited men crowd alongside, walking next to their injured
          boss. Still acting as a foreman, Phineas calls out for his time book and makes an entry as he rolls
          toward town.
         11            Something terrible has happened, yet Phineas gets down from the cart without help. He

              climbs the steps of the Cavendish hotel, where he has been living, and tak~s a seat on the porch

              beside his landlord, Joseph Adams. A few minutes earlier, Adams had seen the Irishman ride
          past shouting for Dr. Harlow, the town physician. Dr. Harlow was not to be found, so the rider
          was sent on to the next village to fetch Dr. Williams. Now Phineas takes a neighborly seat on the
          porch and tells his landlord what happened to him.
         12            That's how Dr. Edward Williams finds Phineas nearly thirty minutes after the accident.'
              Dr. Williams pulls up in his buggy at the hotel porch, and there is Phineas, talking away. Friends,
           workmates, and the curious crowd around as Dr. Williams climbs down from his carriage. "Well,
          here's work enough for you, Doctor," Phineas says to him quite cheerfully.
         13            Dr. Williams examines Phineas's head. He can't believe that this man is still alive. His
              skull is cracked open, as if something has popped out from the inside. Accident victims are
              often too shaken to know what happened, so Dr. Williams turns to Phineas's workmen for the
              story, but Phineas insists on speaking for himself. He tells Dr. Williams that the iron went right
              through his head.
         14            Dr. Williams does not believe him. "I thought he was deceived," Dr. Williams writes in
              his notes. "I asked him where the bar entered, and he pointed to the wound on his cheek, which
              I had not before discovered. This was a slit running from the angle of the jaw forward about one
              and a half inch. It was very much stretched laterally, and was discolored by powder and iron
              rust, at least appeared so. Mr. Gage persisted in saying that the bar went through his head. An
              Irishman standing by said, 'Sure it was so, sir, for the bar is lying in the road below, all blood and
              brains. '"
         15            It's now an hour after the accident. The town's regular physician, Dr. John Martyn
              Harlow, finally arrives at the hotel. The two doctors confer, but Dr. Harlow takes over the case.
              Phineas is a gruesome sight. Bleeding freely from his forehead and inside his mouth, Phineas
              looks to Dr. Harlow like a wounded man just carried in from a battlefield. Yet Phineas is alert,
              uncomplaining, and still telling anyone who'll listen about the accident. Dr. Harlow wants
              Phineas to come in off the porch so he can treat his wound. Phineas gets up and, leaning only
              lightly on Dr. Harlow's arm, climbs up a long flight of stairs to his room. He lies down on his own
              bed so Dr. Harlow can shave his head and examine the wound more closely. What the doctor sees
              is terrible. Something has erupted through the top of Phineas's head, shattering the skull in its
              path and opening the brain to plain sight.
         16            Dr. Harlow does what he can. He cleans the skin around the hole, extracts the small
              fragments of bone, and gently presses the larger pieces of skull back in place. He looks inside
              Phineas's mouth. He can see the hole where the iron passed upward through the roof of his


                      mouth. Dr. Harlow decides to leave the hole open so the wound can drain. Then Dr. Harlow
                 "dresses" the wound, pulling the loose skin back into position and taping it in place with adhesive
                 strips. He puts a compress bandage directly over the wound and pulls Phineas's nightcap down
                 tightly over it. Finally he winds a roller bandage around his forehead to hold all the bandages
                 securely. Only then does he notice Phineas's hands and forearms, which are black with powder
                 burns. Dr. Harlow dresses the burnt skin and has Phineas put to bed with his head elevated. He
                 gives strict orders that his patient is to remain in that position.
      17                  Phineas should have been dead long before this. A thirteen-pound iron rod through
                 the head should kill a person instantly. Surviving that, he should have died of shock soon after
                 reaching Cavendish. He's lost a lot of blood, yet he remains awake and talkative. Even surviving
                 the loss of blood, Phineas should have died of brain swelling. Any hard blow to the body causes
                 injured tissue to swell. The brain is soft, and the skull is hard. A hard blow to the head can rattle
                 the brain around inside like a BB in a tin can. The rattling bruises the brain, and bruised tissue
                 swells. The brain swells, but the skull stays the same size; a swollen brain can jam itself so tightly
                 it will cut off its own blood supply. This swelling can choke off oxygen to parts of the brain long
                 enough to cause permanent damage. It can also cause death.
      18                  That's a "closed brain" injury (sometimes called a concussion). The possibility of a closed
                 brain injury is why doctors fuss if you bang your head falling off a bicycle or crashing a car or
                 getting hit hard in the head with anything. (To prevent closed brain injuries, you should wear
                 a helmet when bicycling. driving a race car, fighting in the infantry, playing tackle football,
                 parachuting, exploring a cave, working on a construction site, or doing just about anything
                 where you could strike your head hard. In Phineas's case, however, a helmet would not have
                 helped.)
      19                  Here Phineas has a stroke ofluck. His is an "open brain" injury. The hole on top of his
                 head gives his battered brain swelling room. The bad news is that his brain is open to infection.
                 At first, though, he does remarkably well. The bleeding from his forehead slows and then stops
                 within twenty-four hours. He remains cheerful and tells Dr. Harlow that he "does not care to see
                 his friends, as he shall be at work in a few days. " The morning after the accident, however, he
                 is glad to see his mother and uncle when they arrive from New Hampshire. Two days after the
                 accident, he takes a turn for the worse. He develops a fever and begins to have delirious spells.
                 His wound is leaking a foul-smelling liquid, a sure sign of infection. His death seems just a
                 matter oftime now.
      20                  More than any other organ, the brain is sealed off from the outside world and from the
                 rest of the body. There are many layers of tissue, bone, and skin to keep it protected from the
                 outside, but there's also a "blood-brain barrier" that keeps out many substances circulating in the
                 blood. Oxygen and nutrients can cross the blood-brain barrier, but many dangerous substances
                 like bacteria cannot. With his skull fractured, Phineas's exposed brain is wide open, making him         
                 an ideal candidate for a fatal infection. No one in Cavendish in 1848, no scientist in America or       
                                                                                                                        
      21
                 Europe, has the slightest notion that bacteria cause infection.
                          Medical science in 1848 knows very little about bacteria, even though they were first
                 seen through microscopes nearly two hundred years before. Today we are used to seeing the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                 microscopic world, but when the microscope was invented in the middle ofthe seventeenth
                 century, it caused a sensation. The microscope became a new kind of "high-tech" entertainment
                                                                                                                          
                 for cultured gentlemen, and in 1665 an Englishman named Robert Hooke came up with a                      

                    microscopic "hit. " He showed off a slide he'd made of an extremely thin slice of cork. Under
                    the microscope lens, Hooke saw that the tissue inside a cork tree was made up of rows of tiny,
                    boxlike structures. They reminded him ofthe bare rooms used by monks in a monastery. Hooke
                    called them "cells. " His cork cells, though, were empty because they were dead and dried out. It
                    would take two centuries to figure out that it's the living stuff inside cells that makes them the
                    fundamental unit oflife.
           22               While Hooke was showing off his "cells, " a sharp-eyed Dutch merchant named Anton van
                    Leeuwenhoek was making more powerful microscopes. Leeuwenhoek took a single drop of water
                    from a rain barrel and turned his microscope on it. In that drop of water, Leeuwenhoek found a
                    whole new planet of very, very small life forms. "Animalcules," he called them. Leeuwenhoek
                    was the first to see single-celled microorganisms, tiny plants and tiny animals, including
                    bacteria. Yet Leeuwenhoek never had the faintest suspicion that some of his "animalcules"
                    caused humans to sicken and to die.



                                                                                                                                                                   "




                In 1665, the English scientist Robert Hooke published this detailed drawing of a flea as seen through the newly invented
                microscope. London society clamored to see more microscope images ofthings too fine for the human eye. From Hooke's
                                  Micrographica; courtesy of Dr. Joseph Gall, the Carnegie Institute of Washington, Baltimore, Md.


           23                 That's more or less the state of knowledge in 1848. Few doctors have ever used a
                     microscope, because it is not considered a medical instrument. These microscopic animals might
                     be marvels of nature, but no doctor suspects that they have anything to do with disease, let alone
                     infections. Doctors in 1848 don't use the word infection, but they know its symptoms well. They
                     call it "sepsis, " and they know from bitter experience how quickly a "septic" wound can go from
                     slight redness to gross swelling to a fatal condition called gangrene .



      24                     The doctors of 1848 don't realize that gangrene is the end result of bacterial infection.
                   They don't realize that floating in the air on dust particles. lurking on fingertips, or growing on
                   the shiny steel blades of their unwashed surgical scalpels are single-celled bacteria and other
                   microscopic life forms. On the smallest surface, there are hundreds of millions of them. They
                   represent thousands of different species; there are tiny plants, tiny fungi, tiny viruses, and
                   tiny animals. Among the microanimals are two particularly dangerous families of bacteria-
                   streptococci and staphylococci ("strep" and "staph," for short). What doctors don't know in 1848,
                   strep and staph do: that the broken head of Phineas is an ideal location to land.
      ::!5                   A wound is an open door. A cut or break in the skin lets staph and strep bacteria colonize
                   the warm, wet, nutrient-rich cells inside. Once these bacteria get established in the body, they
                   reproduce wildly. The body's immune system tries to kill the invading bacteria with an array
                   of special immune cells, while the bacteria try to protect themselves against immune cells by
                   cranking out toxic chemicals. That's an infection. The site of this biological battle between the
                   immune system and bacteria swells up and turns red.
      26                     In 1848, science is still twenty years away from figuring out that infections are the work
                   of living-that is, "biotic"-things. It will take nearly a century for science to develop the first
                   "antibiotic, " penicillin, to counter infections. In 1848, a young Frenchman named Louis Pasteur
                   is still studying chemistry in Paris. Eventually, Pasteur will unravel the three great biological
                   mysteries of his time-fermentation, decay, and infection. All three processes are the work of
                   living microorganisms; Pasteur will call them "germs. 0' Pasteur's "germ theory" will lead to a
                   revolution in medicine. It will inspire an English surgeon named Joseph Lister to try performing
                   surgery in sterile conditions that exclude or kill all microorganisms. Lister will scrub his hands
                   almost raw before operating, he will boil surgical clothing and instruments, and he will set up a
                   machine to spray carbolic acid in the operating room to kill germs in midair. Lister's first sterile
                   operations in 1868 will cut the number of deaths from infection after surgery by 90 percent.
                   For the first time in history, doctors will help more patients with surgery than they harm with
                   postsurgical infections.


      Hooke called the microscopic boxes that he saw in the bark of a cork tree "cells." Compared to his flea pictures, Hooke's cells
       attracted little notice in 1665. Two centuries later, his "cells" turned out to be the fundamental unit of all life. From Hooke's
                           Micrographica; courtesy of Dr. Joseph Gall, the Carnegie Institute of Washington, Baltimore, Md.



     27                None of this progress to come wil1 do Phineas a bit of good back in 1848. instead,
             Phineas is saved by good luck and good care. Dr. Harlow follows the best medical advice of his
             time-keep the wound clean but covered and watch for inflammation. A sign of infection is a
             fluid called "pus" (it's actually dead white blood cells, a sign that the body's immune system is
             attacking bacterial invaders) that collects in pockets to form abscesses. Fourteen days after the
             accident. Phioeas develops a huge abscess under the skin just above his eyes. Phineas is feverish,   
             losing his appetite, and sinking fast. Dr. Harlow lances (punctures) the abscess. He drains the      
             pus and dresses Phineas's forehead again. The fever abates. His scalp begins to heal. Phineas is
             saved by his youth, his iron constitution, and Dr. Harlow's good nursing. Dr. Harlow will always
             be modest about his role in saving Phineas. "1 dressed him," Dr. Harlow will say. "God healed
             hi ffi. "
     28              The patient gains strength. Too much strength, in his doctor's opinion. Dr. Harlow is
             called out of town for a few days, and when he comes back he finds Phineas out of his sickbed.
             His head still heavily bandaged, Phineas is roaming about Cavendish in the rain with no coat and
             thin shoes. He is eating unwisely, refusing nursing advice, and ignoring doctor's orders. Phineas
             says he wants to go home to his mother's house in Lebanon, New Hampshire, twenty miles away.
             He intends to walk. According to the best medical theories of his day, Dr. Harlow diagnoses an
             Unbalance of bodily "humors." This theory, which goes back to the ancient Greeks, declares that
             health is maintained by a balance offour liquids, or humors, in the body-blood, phlegm, yellow
             bile, and black bile. To bring them into balance, Dr. Harlow prescribes two powerful drugs-
             an "emetic" to make Phineas throw up and a "purgative," a powerful laxative, to evacuate his
             bowels. Phineas is knocked flat by the medicines and spends the next two weeks in bed. where
             Dr. Harlow keeps him on a "low," or bland, diet. His humors mayor may not be in balance, but
             Phineas is resting quietly at last.

                                                                                 


Under the microscope, streptococci bacteria have a distinctive beads-on-a-string appearance. "Strep" bacteria live on nearly
everything people touch but are only dangerous if they can penetrate the body's defenses and overpower the immune system.
                                      Microphotograph by H. Morgan, Photo Researchers Inc.





                       Staphylococci bacteria are the other half of the deadly duo of opportunistic bacteria. Infections by "staph" and "strep" were a
                   leading cause of death before the discovery of antibiotic medicines. Somehow, Phineas's immune system beat off their attack.
                                                            Microphotograph by Dr. Tony Brain, Photo Researchers Inc.


                  29                     Ten weeks after the accident, Dr. Harlow declares Phineas fully recovered from his
                               wounds. He puts Phineas in a closed carriage and sends him home to his mother in New
                               Hampshire. Phineas is very weak, but he can walk short distances. He can count, feed and dress
                               himself, and sing. He can speak clearly and make sense of what he hears. Yet there is something
                               odd about the "recovered" Phineas. Just before he leaves Cavendish, Dr. Harlow gives Phineas
                               a little test. The doctor offers Phineas $1, 000 for the pocketful of pebbles that Phineas has
                               collected walking along the Black River near town. Dr. Harlow knows that Phineas can add and
                               subtract, yet Phineas angrily refuses the deal. Dr. Harlow tells himself that a man who was so
                               badly hurt is going to need time to regain his full powers.
                  30                     As soon as Phineas leaves for home, Dr. Harlow writes a short report for the Boston
                               Medical & Surgical Journal. Most doctors ignore Dr. Harlow's article. The few who read it don't
                               believe it. How could a man survive such an injury, let alone make a "complete recovery"? But
                               one Boston doctor is intrigued. He writes to Harlow for information and urges the Vermont
                               doctor to back up his case by collecting formal statements from eye witnesses in Cavendish. The
                               letter is from Henry J. Bigelow, professor of surgery at the Harvard Medical College.


   Four hundred years ago, this was an up-to-date medical book illustration. It shows a half-man, half-woman
surrounded by the signs of the zodiac and the four "humors" that for centuries doctors believed controlled health-
blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. Balancing the sanguine, or blood, humor was the "reason" for bleeding
                                           the sick. Photo Researchers Inc.




      31                  As soon as Phineas leaves for home, Dr. Harlow writes a short report for the Boston
                 Medical & Surgical Journal. Most doctors ignore Dr. Harlow's article. The few who read it don't
                 believe it. How could a man survive such an injury, let alone make a "complete recovery"? But
                 one Boston doctor is intrigued. He writes to Harlow for information and urges the Vermont
                 doctor to back up his case by collecting formal statements from eyewitnesses in Cavendish. The
                 letter is from Henry J. Bigelow, professor of surgery at the Harvard Medical College.
      32                  In the spring, Phineas is back in Cavendish, carrying his tamping iron. He never goes
                 anywhere without it these days. Phineas has come for a final examination by Dr. Harlow and           
                 to reclaim his old job on the railroad. His left eye looks intact, but the vision has gradually
                 faded away. Phineas has a huge scar on his forehead and a small scar under his cheekbone, but        
                                                                                                                      
                 otherwise he is physically healed. Yet Dr. Harlow has private doubts about Phineas's mental state.
                 Phineas is just not his old self.                                                                    
      33                  His old employers on the railroad quickly come to the same conclusion. The new Phineas
                 is unreliable and, at times, downright nasty. He insults old workmates and friends. He spouts        
                 vulgar language in the presence of women. He changes his mind and his orders from minute
                 to minute. The railroad contractors let him go. Dr. Harlow, who is keeping confidential notes
                 on Phineas, sadly writes, "His contractors, who regarded him as the most efficient and capable
                 foreman in their employ previous to his injury, considered the change in his mind so marked
                 that they could not give him his place again. "
           When he was an old man, Dr. Henry]. Bigelow wore a long beard and sober clothes, befitting one of Boston's senior
          surgeons. But when he was a young man studying medicine in Paris, Bigelow was a snappy dresser. From a daguerreotype
                           by Leon Foucault, Paris, 1841; courtesy of Count way Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School




      34                 Phineas's old friends also wash their hands of him. Dr. Harlow writes: "He is fitful,
                 irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity Iwhich was not previously his custom),
                 manifesting but little deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint or advice when it conflicts
                 with his desires. " Phineas comes up with all sorts of new plans, the doctor writes, but they are no
                 sooner announced than he drops them. Phineas is like a small child who says he is running away
                 from home after lunch and then comes up with a new idea over his sandwich. Dr. Harlow writes,
                 "A child in his intellectual capacities and manifestations, he has the animal passions of a strong        
                 man. " A doctor is bound by his oath not to reveal the details of a patient's condition without           
                 permission, so Dr. Harlow will keep his observations to himself for twenty years.                         
      35                 Meantime, Dr. Harlow has another letter from Dr. Bigelow at Harvard, who thanks him               
                 for collecting the eyewitness statements about the accident. Would Mr. Gage consider coming to
                                                                                                                           
                 Boston at Dr. Bigelow's expense so his case could be presented at the medical school and before
                 the Boston Society of Medical Improvement? Dr. Harlow and Dr. Big;elow make arrangements.                 
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                      WHAT WE THOUGHT ABOUT HOW WE THOUGHT
                                                                                                                           
                  In the winter of 1850, Phineas goes to Boston so the doctors there can see for themselves. What          
                  are doctors like in 18s0? They look like gentlemen, or at least they do in the oil portraits that they   
                  have painted ofthemselves to boost their social status. If you lined up a gallery of these doctors'
                  portraits, you'd see a long row of wise faces, satin waistcoats, gold watch chains, and side-            
                  whiskers. By 1850, there are photographs of doctors, showing wise faces, satin waistcoats, and           
                  whiskers. Photographs of doctors at work, though, are rare. Photographing anyone or anything             
                  moving is difficult because the light-sensitive plates are very slow, and a single exposure can take     
                  a fall minute. Yet the year before Phineas's accident, a Boston photographer named Josiah Hawes
                                                                                                                           
                  sets up his camera in a surgical operating theater and takes a "daguerreotype" la photograph on
                  a metal plate) that he entitles, "Third Operation Using Ether Anesthesia at the Massachusetts
                                                                                                                           
                  General Hospital. " The operating room is called the Ether Dome and still exists today.                  
      2                   The picture that Hawes makes is probably the very first of doctors being doctors instead         
                  of doctors posing for portraits. In Hawes's photograph, the surgeons stand impatiently beside            
                  the operating table, ready to start work. This is truly a historic moment. Before the introduction       
                  of ether a few months before, surgeons had to employ powerful assistants to hold down patients
                  or restrain them with leather-covered chains. Because of the discovery of ether anesthesia, the
                                                                                                                           
                  doctors in the Ether Dome can take their time operating.                                                 
      3                   Notice two things about Hawes's picture. First, it's all men. There are no female hospital        
                  nurses, let alone female doctors. The second thing you should notice is what the doctors are              
                  wearing-nothing special. They are in street clothes-black frockcoats, shiny satin vests, and              
                  linen shirts. No one is wearing surgical scrubs. No one is wearing surgical gloves, masks, or
                                                                                                                            
                  booties. These doctors may not wash their hands until after the operation. These men know
                  nothing about bacteria-but they think they know all about the brain.
                                                                                                                          
     4                This is what an audience of doctors looks like when Phineas arrives in Boston in January
               1850, tamping iron in hand. He is Dr. Bigelow's guest but also his prize specimen. Phineas is
               examined, measured, and discussed. He agrees to sit for a plaster "life" mask. Dr. Bigelow puts
               straws up Phineas's nose so he can breathe while the doctor pours liquid plaster over his face.
               Then the plaster is lifted off to make a mold. From it, Dr. Bigelow casts a three-dimensional
               version of Phineas's face. His eyes are shut, but the enormous scar on his forehead is clear.



          The patient is the one in the cotton gown and wool socks, lying unconscious on the table. Knocked out by inhaling ether
     fumes, the patient can feel no pain in this state of "twilight sleep." When word of the discovery of anesthesia reached England,
         a London newspaper rejoiced, announcing, "We Have Conquered Pain." Massachusetts General Hospital, Archives and Special
                                        Collections; pdnt courtesy of Harvard University Art Museums


     5                  Phineas appears in person at Dr. Bigelow's lectures to convince the assembled doctors
               that his case is neither an exaggeration nor a fraud. Dr. Bigelow tackles that question head-on:
               "The leading feature of this case is its improbability," Dr. Bigelow admits. "A physician who
               holds in his hand a crowbar, three and a half feet long, and more than thirteen pounds in weight,
               will not readily believe that it has been driven with a crash through the brain of a man who is
               still able to walk off, talking with composure and equanimity of the hole in his head. Yet there is
               every reason for supposing it in this case literally true. "
     6                  The evidence is standing before them, "crowbar" in hand. Even confronted with that,
               there are still doctors in the audience who don't believe that the tamping iron went through





                   Phineas's brain. Perhaps, they say, it just hit him a glancing blow on the head. Dr. Bigelow reads
                   out accounts from Dr. Williams and Dr. Harlow. He adds other eyewitness statements from
                   Cavendish people including Mr. Adams, the hotel owner, and some of Phineas's workmen. Dr.
                   Bigelow unveils his plaster life mask of Phineas. The casting clearly shows scars where the iron
                   went in and came out. Yet there a~e doctors who think that Phineas is a humbug, a fake from the
                   back woods of Vermont.
      7                    There are two other groups of doctors paying close attention to Dr. Bigelow's
                   presentation. The two rival groups are eager to believe in Phineas's case. Their theories directly
                   contradict each other, and yet both groups believe that Phineas's case supports their side. As
                   it turns out, both groups are slightly right but mostly wrong. Yet their wrong theories-and
                   Phineas himself-will steer our knowledge of the brain in the right direction.

                             


      This is half a brain. On top and in front is the cortex. In the back and underneath are the cerebellum and the brain stem. On the
          bottom of the cortex is the limbic system, which coordinates memory, sensation, and emotion. In Phineas's case, the tamping
                                     iron passed through the frontal cortex, leaving the rest of his brain relatively unharmed.
                                                                       Illustration by Jerry Malone


      8                    Everybody knows that people use their brains to think. Right? And, of course, emotions,
                   especially love, come from the heart. Wrong? Obviously, our ideas about how the body works
                   have changed. Three hundred years ago, everybody "knew" that anger was controlled by the
                   spleen. Twenty-three hundred years ago, the ancient Greeks "knew" that the heart was the center
                   of emotion and thought. Aristotle, the greatest scientist of his time, "knew" that the primary
                   function of the brain was to cool the blood. It isn't until 1800 that an Austrian doctor named

 
            Franz Josef Gall declares that the brain is the seat of the intelligence, the emotions, and the will.
        Still, it takes time for new ideas to sink in. Even today, we don't talk about a lover who's been
           dumped as feeling "broken-brained."

         9              By Phineas's time, doctors know what a brain looks like, at least from the outside.
              They learn as students of gross (a term for "large-scale") anatomy by dissecting the cadavers
              of paupers, prisoners, and the unclaimed. By 1850, all doctors know the gross anatomy of the
            skeleton, internal organs, muscles, and, of course, the brain. They just don't know how the brain


              works.

      10             You can have a look for yourself. Imagine you could click open the top of your head
 
  
              and lift your brain out. It weighs about three pounds. Some compare it to half of an enormous
              walnut, but if you can't visualize a three-pound walnut half, think of a bicycle helmet (bicycle
         helmets look the way they do so they can surround the brain). Think of your brain as a big cap

         perched on a stalk and protected by the neck flap. The big cap is your cerebral cortex. The stalk is
          your brain stem, which plugs into your spinal cord. The brain stem keeps many of your automatic
         functions going, like your breathing and heartbeat. The neck flap covers your cerebellum, which
            coordinates movement. Without your cerebellum, you couldn't walk upright, touch your finger
              to your nose, or turn this page. Without your brain stem, you couldn't breathe. Without your

              cerebral cortex, you wouldn't be human.

         11             The cortex is where you think, remember, learn, imagine, read, speak, listen, and dream.



              In the cortex, you feel your emotions and you make sense of what your senses are telling you. The
              cortex is where you actually see what your eyes transmit, smell what your nose senses, taste what
           your tongue samples, touch what your nerves report, and hear what your ears pick up. None of

              this vital activity is visible in gross anatomy. By just holding a brain in your hands you (and the
   
              doctors of Phineas's day) can't see the thing that makes this organ work, the brain's fundamental
                 unit, which is the brain cell, or neuron. You'll need a microscope and a lot of skill to see a single
   
              neuron, but all of these structures-the cortex, cerebellum, brain stem, and spinal cord-are
          made up of neurons specialized to relay and transmit tiny electrical impulses. By layering and
           connecting billions of neurons, you get a brain.


           Here you can see the division between the two hemispheres of the cortex. The crack between them is called the
           "interhemispheric fissure ... The two hemispheres specialize in different mental skills, but brain functions are not
           as neatly divided as they appear. Phineas's tamping iron struck the left hemisphere first but also grazed the right
                     hemisphere 'on the way out. He lost something from both hemispheres. Illustration by David Macaulay



      12                But by looking at your brain in your hand, you'll notice that the cortex splits in half right
                down the middle. The left hemisphere and the right hemisphere are separated on top by a deep
                crack-the interhemispheric fissure-but joined in the middle of the brain by a thick mat of
                nerves-the corpus callosum. The corpus is the switchboard for signals back and forth between
                the two halves. In recent times, scientists have learned that the two hemispheres specialize in
                certain skills. Sometimes you'll hear brain researchers talk about a "right brain" or a "left brain"
                skill. They really mean right or left hemisphere. But you can't see any skills by looking at the
                outside of a brain.
      13                Indeed, if you're looking at your brain from the outside, you might wonder if you're
                holding the cortex backwards. The front of the cortex seems to be hanging in space until you
                realize that your face fits the space underneath. The part of the cortex above your face is the
                frontal lobe. The frontal lobe is the part that concerns us most regarding Phineas, but you should
                know the other lobes-the parietal lobe on top and the occipital lobe at the back of your head,
                right above your cerebellum. Wrapping around your temples on the side of your head are the
                temporal lobes. Each hemisphere has its own frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes. All
                together, the cortex is a soft mass of folded nerve tissue. It looks as if your cortex was folded up
                quickly and stuffed in any old way, but the truth is that every human brain is folded in exactly the
               same way. How the neurons inside those folds and ridges connect is what makes every human
                being singular.


           The brain cortex is like a city; every part has an address. Instead of a city's east or west side, the cortex has a left and right
      hemisphere. The folds and ridges in the hemispheres are like cross streets, and medical students must memorize everyone. The
      cortex also has four lobes-the frontal (in front), the parietal (on top), the occipital (at the back), and the temporal (on the side).
       A brain "address" can specify left or right hemisphere, the lobe, the nearest ridge or fold, and whether the location is on top or
       bottom, inside or out, and front or back. Phineas was injured most seriously on the inside ofthe left frontal lobe, but scientists
                                       are still arguing about the exact address. Illustration by David Macaulay

      14                  The Boston doctors watching Phineas in 1850 haven't a clue about neurons, which
                 won't be discovered for another twenty years. Still, these doctors know that the brain sits atop
                 the spinal cord, a thick, bundled cable of thousands of threads. Doctors do not know that each
                 thread is a bundle of microscopic neurons. They do know that cutting the spinal cord results in
                 paralysis. The higher the break in the spinal cord, the more complete the paralysis. They know
                 that if the cord is cut at the base of the brain stem, the patient dies.
      15                  That's why Phineas interests the doctors. His injury is not at the back ofWs head in
                 the cerebellum or at the bottom of the brain near the brain stem. He was struck through the
                 forehead, and the iron must have pierced the frontal lobe of the cortex. If Phineas survived with
                 a large piece of his cortex destroyed, then what does the cortex do? Across America and Europe,
                 doctors are fiercely divided over this very question. These are the two rival schools. One group
                 thinks the brain is a "whole intelligence, " that is, that your brain is one interconnected "mind."
                 Let's call them the "Whole Brainers." They think of the cortex as a chamber holding a formless
                 cloud or jelly driven by a mysterious "vital force." Tluough this force, every part of the brain
                 is connected to every other part. The Whole Brainers believe that thoughts and commands
                 can originate anywhere in the brain jelly/cloud and flash into action. If one part of the brain is
                                                                                                                        
                 injured, then the functions or thoughts that came from there will flow to another part.                
      16                  Unfortunately, the Whole Brainers have no hard evidence for their theory. Instead they
                 must look for unusual cases that might back them up. Phineas seems to be such a case. Dr.              
                 Bigelow of Harvard thinks so. He is a Whole Brainer.                                                   
      17                  His opponents believe in "localized function"; that is, they believe that the brain is
                 divided into specific areas that control specific things. Let's call them the "Localizers." They are
                                                                                                                        
                 followers of the Austrian Dr. Gall, who started the brain revolution by declaring that the brain       
                 was the seat of intelligence, emotions, and will. Dr. Gall called his brain science "phrenology"
                 (a made up Greek word). By any name, the Localizers, or Phrenologists, believe that "organs"
                 inside the brain control specific functions. They draw up a model Phrenological Head to show
                 the "organs" in their correct positions. The "Organ of Veneration [respect!" and the "Organ
                 of Benevolence (kindness]," for example, are supposed to be just above the left eyebrow.
                 (Remember where Phineas was hit by the iron? Stay tuned.) Unfortunately, the Phrenologists
                 have no way of knowing which part of the brain controls what. "Benevolence" cannot be seen on
                 the outside of the brain.


A Phrenological Head is definitely an eye-catcher-bald as a billiard ball and each "organ" carefully outlined and labeled. By the
middle of the nineteenth century, a popular parlor game is "reading" one's character by feeling the skull for bumps and dips and
                       then matching them to a head chart such as this one. Hulton Collection, Getty Images


18              Later in the nineteenth century, scientists will discover that a weak electrical
        current applied to the exposed brain of a laboratory animal will make certain muscles
        twitch involuntarily and certain senses sharpen or go dead. In the early twentieth century,
        scientists will invent more sophisticated and less dangerous ways to "see" brain activity.
        Eventually they will chart the brain's electrical signals by attaching electrodes to the scalp for
        an "electroencephalograph, " or EEG. The EEG plots amazing patterns of electrical activity


                   that match specific areas of the brain with specific functions. Toward the end of the twentieth
                   century, scientists will invent brain scanners that can "image" the electrical and chemical activity
                   inside a living brain.
      19                    Back in 1850, the Localizers/Phrenologists haven't seen a single thought or brainwave.
                   Still, that doesn't stop them from identifying thirtyseven "organs" of the brain. How do they do
                   it? Bumps. That's right. Bumps on the head. The Phrenologists reason that if you have a strong
                   organ, it will be big and project from your skull as a bump. If you have a weak organ, it will be
                   small and you'll have a dip or depression in your skuLl. Run your hand over your own skull and
                   you will find all sorts of knobs, bumps, dips, and so on. The Phrenologists decide that if you have
                   a bump over your Organ of Amativeness, you are a person with a strong talent for physical love.
                   If you have a dip or a depression over your Organ of Philoprogenitiveness (also known as parental
                   love), you're not going to be fond of children.
      20                    Among Boston doctors, phrenology is considered serious stuff when Phineas walks into
                   the middle of the debate of the Whole Brainers versus the Localizers. Both sides seize him as
                   proof of their belief. Dr. Bigelow and his fellow Whole Brainers say that Phineas would surely
                   have died if specific areas of the brain were vital to specific functions. After all, the tamping iron
                   carried away pieces of Phineas's brain. If every part of the brain was vital, then he should be dead.
                   Yet here is Phineas alive in Boston, walking, talking, and taking care of himself. Therefore, say
                   the Whole Brainers, the whole brain must be able to perform any function of one part.                    
      2I                    On the other side, Dr. Harlow is a Localizer, or at least he is a friend of some leading        
                   Localizers/Phrenologists. The Localizers say Phineas proves their theory. The tamping iron has           
                   not killed him because the damage is limited to specific organs that are not critical to life. Yet the   
                   Localizers/Phrenologists don't have aU the facts. In 1850, when Phineas comes to Boston, Dr.             
                   Harlow feels he must keep the details of his patient's personality problems confidential, but he
                                                                                                                            
                   does tell some of the truth to Dr. Nelson Sizer. Dr. Sizer is a big man in phrenology and lectures
                   on it all over New England. Dr. Harlow leaks the information to Dr. Sizer that the "completely           
                   recovered" Phineas is not the old Phineas. Dr. Sizer tries to disguise the source of his report to the   
                   American Phrenological Journal in 1851, writing, "We have been informed by the best authority            
                   that after the man recovered, and while recovering, he was grossly profane, coarse, and vulgar,          
                   to such a degree that his society was intolerable to decent people."
                            Dr. Sizer's report is wonderful news for the Localizers/phrenoiogists. As Dr. Sizer
                                                                                                                            
                  explains, ''It'we remember correctly, the iron passed through the regions of the organs of               
                   BENEVOLENCE and VENERATION, which left these organs without influence in his character,                  
                   hence his profanity, and want of respect and kindness."                                                                                                                                                                            


           An MRI scan allows us to look inside a living person's head and see a slice of everything from the throat to the spinal cord. Inside
           the brain, you can see the different lobes of the cortex; the corpus callosum, which joins the two hemispheres; the cerebellum at
           the back of the head; and the brain stem. Compare this to the phrenological chart that appears earlier in this chapter. MRI scan by
                                                     Scott Canzine and Sue Trainor, Photo Researchers Inc.


           23              In the long run, the Localizers will turn out to be somewhat right about localization but
               completely wrong about phrenological organs. The Whole Brainers will turn out to be right
                    about the complex interconnections of the brain but wrong about the brain acting as a whole.



                 The 10 billion neurons in your brain are not connected at random . They are organized into "local
                 circuits" within the cortex; the local circuits form "subcortical nuclei." which together form
                 "cortical regions. " which form "systems." which form "systems of systems." which form you.
     24                   Specific areas of the brain do control specific functions and behaviors. but it's not always
                 as "logical" as we would imagine. Skills that you think should be in the same brain patch are
                 scattered about in different places in the cortex. Different areas of the cortex let you recognize
                 letters in a book or faces in a crowd. or know whether you are standing upright. Yet many of these
                 localized functions are also controlled by interactions with other parts of the brain. The human
                 brain. it turns out. is both localized and interconnected. We know so much more about the brain
                 today than the Phrenologists and the Whole Brainers did in 1850. yet we really understand only
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                 the rough outlines.
                                                                                                                                          
                                               


       This ceramic bust by L.N. FowleI' was lO h lp serious phrenologists local' the thirty-seven "organs" of the brain while feeling
       arou nd on th e heau for bumps and dtp~. PIUCllOl. b'Y lost redibility as sciellce found b ltel ways to probe the brian. Camprtre
                            lh is to the "coIonal" MEL in the chapler "Put ting Phineas Together Again" Photograph by D. Parker,
                                                                               Photo Researchers Inc.



        Around 1920, a group of Harvard Medical School students gather around the skull of Phineas Gage. The life-size plaster model
          of Phineas's head made by Dr. Bigelow stands on the left corner of the table. Time has made the skull fragile, but Phineas Gage's
          fame still draws visitors to Harvard's Countway Library to look without touching. Photograph from the Warren Anatomical Museum,
                                                   Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School


          25       Back in 1850, Dr. Bigelow tells the Boston doctors, "Taking all the circumstances into
                   consideration, it may be doubted whether the present is not the most remarkable history of
                   injury to the brain which has been recorded. " He also announces that Mr. Gage has graciously
                   agreed to donate his famous tamping iron to the Harvard Medical College. Dr. Bigelow donates
                   the plaster head of Phineas to go with it. The plaster head remains in Boston, but Phineas and his
                   tamping iron soon slip out of town.





          Although it is being pulled by four horses instead of the usual six, this is a New Hampshire-built Concord stagecoach,      
      somewhere in Chile at about the time that Phineas Gage arrived there. We have no way of knowing ifit is Phineas at the reins.   
                                                      New Hampshire Historical Society                                                


                                                                                                                                      
                                                  FOLLOWING PHINEAS GAGE                                                              

                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                      
                      In 1859, Phineas washes up on his family's doorstep in San Francisco. His mother has
              moved to California from New Hampshire to be with her youngest daughter, Phebe, and her
              new husband, David Shattuck. In July, a very sick Phineas gets off a boat in San Francisco and
              somehow finds his way to the Shattuck house. Phineas is in "feeble condition, " his mother says,
              much changed since she last saw him in New Hampshire. Phineas tells his mother that he is only
              suffering from the voyage. He had been terribly seasick on his first voyage from Boston to Chile in
              1852, he tells her. He will get over this. It takes months, but he seems to fully recover.

         2            In San Francisco, Phineas is not a good invalid. He hates resting. He has worked hard all

           his life, on the family farm, on the railroad, in the livery stable, and on the Chilean stagecoaches.

             As Phineas gradually feels better, he wants to go right out and get back to work. Finally Phineas
           takes a job plowing for a farmer near the little town of Santa Clara. Phineas tell his mother that

             he has no trouble with the farm work, but he soon quarrels with the farmer. He moves to another
             farm, then another. Phineas is "always finding something which did not suit him in every place
            he tried, " says his mother. That February, he is back in San Francisco for a visit. At the dinner

             table, he suddenly falls into "a fit. "
        3            A fit is an epileptic seizure. Epilepsy is not a disease but a complex of symptoms.
            Basically, a seizure is an electrical storm in your brain's nerve cells. It can begin in one area of the

             brain and spread to other regions, sometimes sending your muscles into involuntary
             convulsions. Seizures are relatively common; about one person in 200 will experience a seizure,

             mild or severe, at some time in life. But an epileptic seizure is only a symptom; the cause can be
            anything from a tumor, to an inherited genetic disposition to seizures, to a blow to the head. In
            our time, we control most epileptic symptoms with powerful drugs called "anticonvulsants, "
            because uncontrolled seizures can cause their own brain damage.
  


    By the time a seasick Phineas Gage staggered ashore here in 1859, San Francisco was still a frontier town on the farthest edge of
                                 the continent. Photograph from the San Francisco History Center, San Francisco Public Library


    4                      In 1860, severe epileptic seizures are not controllable. All the doctors in San Francisco
              can offer Phineas are theories, useless drugs, and nursing instructions. After that first seizure
              at his sister's dinner table, he recovers almost immediately with no memory of the fit or any ill
              effect. Within hours, he has two more seizures. In the morning, he wakes up feeling like his old
              self and insists that he has to get back to work. Back in Santa Clara, he switches farm jobs again.
              In May, he comes into San Francisco to visit his mother. He seems fine. Two days later, at five
              o'clock in the morning, Phineas has a severe seizure. Then he has another and another. The
              intervals between seizures grow shorter and shorter.
                                                                                                                                        
    5                  The family physician comes and "bleeds" him. By 1860, the practice of bleeding a patient                         
              is the last gasp of a treatment that goes back to the "bodily humors" theory of the ancient Greeks.                       
              The doctor who treats Phineas decides he has too much blood and draws off the "extra." It's                               
              outmoded treatment, even for 1860. Back in Vermont in 1848, Dr. Harlow bled Phineas at the                                
              height of his fever. Without understanding why, Dr. Harlow may have helped Phineas at that
              moment of crisis. Drawing blood reduces blood pressure slightly, which may have taken some of
              the pressure offhis swollen brain. But bleeding does nothing for epileptic seizures.
    6                  Phineas's seizures are probably caused by slow changes in brain tissue damaged in the
              original accident. Why the damage worsens as Phineas grows older is unknown. Possibly Phineas
              strikes his head again. Perhaps the constant jarring in the driver's seat of a lumbering stagecoach
              causes a concussion on the site of the old damage. Perhaps Phineas has a low-grade bacterial
              infection or perhaps a brain tumor. No one can say why, but now Phineas's seizures grow more
              violent and more frequent. One after another, the seizures leave him weaker and weaker.

           7            They finally kill him on May 21, 1860, at his sister's house in San Francisco. The
              immediate cause of death is probably hypothermia-his body can't control its internal
             temperature. In our time, we read about hypothermia killing mountain climbers, or sailors who
               fall into cold water. An epileptic seizure creates the same effect as shivering in icy water. In cold
             water, you shiver-your muscles spasm-to heat up your body. While shivering violently in
               cold water, you don't realize you are also sweating as your muscles throw off heat. Eventually
               the muscles expel heat faster than it can be replaced. Your blood temperature starts to fall. Your
               internal organs, especially the brain and heart, need a constant core temperature to function. As
               the brain detects a fall in blood temperature, it automatically protects itselfby shutting down the
               blood supply to the hands and feet. You lose feeling. If you keep losing heat, the brain shuts down
  
                blood circulation over a larger and larger area of your skin. Phineas's muscle seizures are causing
                the same effect. His brain shuts down circulation to his feet and hands, then his skin, and then
  
                organ by organ until his brain must choose between blood for itself and blood for the heart. His
               heart stops. This is how Phineas dies, twenty days short of his thirty-seventh birthday.
          8            He is buried at Laurel Hill Cemetery in San Francisco. Phineas is a stranger in the city,
              and few outside his family circle know anything about his curious past. No California newspaper
               notes his death or burial. Family news travels slowly across the continent. Back east, the country
                is drifting toward Civil War, and when it breaks out the following April, doctors soon have more
  
         9
                pressing concerns than Phineas Gage .
                         Half the world away from San Francisco in 1862, French surgeon Paul Broca in Paris
              announces a discovery that finally turns brain theory into brain science. Dr. Broca shows how
            damage to one very small spot in the brain causes one very specific kind of damage. Broca is
            still unable to study a living brain, but he has been performing autopsies on the brains of stroke
             victims. A stroke is an interruption of the blood supply to the brain that causes localized damage

  
  
                and often leaves stroke patients without the ability to speak. Broca notices that in the brains
                of stroke patients who'd lost the power to speak there is visible damage in a small area on the
               outside of the left frontal lobe.
  

                         The unquiet grave orPhineas Gage was dislUrbed once in 1867 by Dr. Harlow and then again in 1940 by the rapidly
                          growing city. San Francisco needed the land under the old pioneer cemetery where he was buried. The remains of
                      Phineas, his mother, his brother-in-law, and 35.000other San Francisco pioneers were dug up by the city and moved
                      to a mass grave in a suburban cemetery. Thei r headstones and tombs were trucked away for landfill. In 1944, a strong
                    coastal storm uncovered the missing tombstones under a highway, and these boys scrambled up to see. lfPhineas Gage
                                           had a tombstone, it was somewhere in this stone pi/e. PIWfogfUph frorr! the 50rt Francisco History Certter,
                                                                                   Scm Fnlrtci.~o Pilblic I.iurory



       10            The spot becomes famous as "Broca's area." To find it, put your hand on the top of your
  .
                left ear, directly above your ear hole. Move your fingers about two inches forward. Underneath
                the skull is your "Broca's area. " If it's damaged, you will lose the ability to speak. In medical
  
  


   
                  language, you will have "aphasia. " Soon after Broca's announcement, a German named Carl
               Wernicke identifies a second area on the left temporal lobe that separately controls the ability to
   
                  understand speech. The loss of the ability to understand what is said to you is called "receptive
              aphasia. " Who could have imagined that these two skills/would be controlled from two different
                places in the brain? Broca's and Wernicke's areas are the first anatomical proof oflocalization.
                Other brain researchers soon learn to use low-voltage electricity to stimulate specific points on
     
       

                  the brain. Bit by bit, the map of the brain grows more detailed and more localized.
            11            The new scientific map of the brain has no relation to our old friend the Phrenological
     
                  Head. Phrenology falls into disgrace, even though the Phrenologists were right about
               localization. The Whole Brainers are also shaken. If speech is localized on these two spots, how
   
                could someone with massive frontal lobe injuries-Phineas Gage, for example-speak? And yet
   
              Dr. Harlow had said that Phineas had fully recovered. Of course, few doctors in Boston. remember
                 much about the Gage case, and even Dr. Harlow has lost track of Phineas.
       12            By the time Dr. Harlow finds Phineas again, he is too late. After Phineas leaves for South
  
                  America in 1852, Dr. Harlow's contact with the Gage family is broken. Quietly, he has wondered
   
                  what became of his most celebrated patient. Then in 1866, the year after the Civil War ends, Dr.
                Harlow, now running a small practice in Woburn, Massachusetts, finds an address for Hannah
                Gage in San Francisco. He writes to her, and his letter makes the long trek across America. Mrs.
                Gage is delighted to hear from the doctor who'd done so much for her son. Unfortunately, she has
                 the sad duty to report his death six years before.
             13            It is too late for an autopsy, and California is too far for a research visit. But Dr. Harlow
  
 
                  doesn't give up. They exchange cordial letters. Mrs. Gage describes Phineas's last illness. She fills
   
                  in the details of his life after he left the medical spotlight in Boston. She recalls how Phineas was
                extremely fond of his little nephews and nieces. Dr. Harlow notes her description of how Phineas
               would entertain them "with the most fabulous recitals of his wonderful feats and hairbreadth
                escapes, without any foundation except in his fancy." Dr. Harlow concludes that Phineas had "a
                  great fondness for children, horses, and dogs-only exceeded by his attachment for his tamping

                  iron, which was his constant companion during the remainder of his life. "
  

     In 1862, Paul Broca found an area on the lower left frontal lobe that controlled the ability to speak. The discovery of Broca's area
       finished off the theories of the Phrenologists and the Whole Brainers. Soon after, Carl Wernicke found another area on the left
                                   temporal lobe that controlled the ability to understand speech. Illustration by Jerry Malone


    14                   Finally, Dr. Harlow makes an unusual request. Explaining the importance of her son's
                 case to science, Dr. Harlow recalls how many scoffed at Phineas when Dr. Bigelow first presented
                 his case in Boston. Now there is a way to settle the question, Dr. Harlow explains. Would Mrs.
                 Gage allow her son's body to be exhumed-dug up-from his grave? Would she allow the skull to
                 be removed and shipped to Massachusetts?



 In his later years, Dr. John Martyn Harlow became an important man in Woburn, a state senator, an advisor to
the governor, and a bank president. When he died in 1907, he left his large estate to various charities, including
 Middlesex County Medical Society. In 1998, the society had enough of Dr. Harlow's money left to help pay for
  the bronze monument to Phineas Gage on the town green in Cavendish, Vermont. Countway Library of Medicine,
                                              Harvard Medical School


    15                  What a request. Surely Dr. Harlow must be held in the highest regard by Hannah Gage.
                Why else would she consent? With her son-in-law and the mayor of San Francisco, who happens
                to be a physician, standing by as witnesses, Phineas's coffin is uncovered and carried to a
                shed. There, Dr. J. D. B. Stillman, a local surgeon, removes the skull. The huge fracture on the
                forehead is unmistakable. Dr. Stillman removes something else from the coffin-the tamping
                iron that Phineas carried everywhere, even to his grave. That December, David Shattuck takes
                the skull and tamping iron with him when he travels east on business. Early in the new year, he
                hands them over to an extremely grateful and very excited Dr. Harlow in Massachusetts.
    16                  At last Dr. Harlow is at liberty to tell the full story of Phineas Gage's "recovery" twenty
                years before. He appears before the Massachusetts Medical Society in 1868 and spills the
                beans. "This case has been cited as one of complete recovery ... without any impairment to the
                intellect, " he says, but in truth, Phineas's personality changed drastically after the accident.
                "Previous to his injury, though untrained in the schools, he possessed a well-balanced mind, and
                was looked upon by those who knew him as a shrewd, smart business man, very energetic and
                persistent in executing all his plans of operation. In this regard, his mind was radically changed,
                so decidedly that his friends and acquaintances said he was 'no longer Gage. '"
    17                  Phineas went from being "the most efficient and capable foreman" on the railroad to a
                man who couldn't be trusted because he couldn't get along with anyone. The new Phineas was
                pigheaded and stubborn one moment and wishy-washy and vague the next. "I think you have
                been shown that the subsequent history and progress of the case only warrant us in saying that
                physically, the recovery was quite complete," says Dr. Harlow. "Mentally the recovery certainly
                was only partial. " The new Phineas could walk, drive a team of horses, and sail away to Chile, but
                he had lost a vital skill"':""'he no longer knew how to be social.
    18                  Being social is a hard skill to measure. Social behavior goes beyond the ability to activate
                the correct muscles or decode the right spoken sounds. It's different from having manners.
                Manners are learned, and they differ greatly from culture to culture. Your parents teach you the
                "right" way to eat or to greet strangers, but other parents in other countries teach their children
                other "right" ways. Forks or chopsticks or fingers, there's no "right" way to put food in your
                mouth, yet all humans swallow the same way. Swallowing is automatic behavior. Using a fork is
                learned behavior. Eating politely in the company of others is social behavior.


       It's hard to believe that this tamping iron shot through the skull without killing Phineas Gage. Dr. Harlow had their picture
                  taken together in 1868 to document his case. Glennon Collection, Woburn Public Library, by permission of the
                                                             Trustees of the Library


                                                                                                                                          .'
        In death, Phineas's skull revealed the unmistakable signs of his terrible accident. Today, Phineas's skull, tamping iron,
           and life mask are exhibited at Harvard Medical School. Photograph by Doug Mindel!, skull courtesy of the Countway Library of
                                                         Medicine. Harvard Medical School

                                                                                         
                  19           In your brain, Broca's area may let you speak and Wernicke's area may let you
  
  
                       understand, but listening is also a complicated social behavior. Whether you realize it or not,
  
                    you've been taught how to listen-how to make or break eye contact, how to murmur agreement
  
  
                       or quiet objection, how to smile at the right moment or not to s~ile at all if the subject is grave .
                     You also know how to show (or hide) your emotional reactions.' You can laugh or yawn, roll your
                       eyes upward in boredom, or open your eyes wide in delight. All of these behaviors can mean
  
                      something entirely different in another culture, but all cultures have listening behavior.
               20           To act human, you mix emotions, actions, routines, customs, manners, words, and
                     expressions in a predictable way. That's what Phineas seems to have lost. Bossing a railroad
  
                     construction gang requires more than a loud voice. A gang has to be able to ."read" the social
                   behavior of the foreman. They have to know if he's angry or just joking, if his orders are
                    reasonable, or if his judgment can be trusted. He has to be able to "read" the social behavior
  


  
          
                       of his men, to know who are the reliable ones and who are the troublemakers. By all reports,
                       the old Phineas was an excellent foreman. The new Phineas was not. All these changes were
                       brought on by a hole through a specific part of his brain.
       21           In Boston twenty years before, the central exhibit had been Phineas himself, alive
  
                       and seemingly well. Now Dr. Harlow reveals the clincher-his skull. He has "prepared" it for
                      inspection, carefully sawing through the bone at just above eyebrow level so the top of the
         cranium can be lifted off. Now his audience can see the hole in the top of his mouth through
                      which the rod passed. The top of Phineas's skull is an amazing sight. The doctors can see where
       
           
                       Dr. Harlow pushed two large fragments back into place and how the edges started to regrow,
       
                   unmistakable proof that Phineas survived the trauma and that his body started to heal the
                       damage. Yet there is a visible hole in the top, a small triangular opening the size of a quarter,
        
          
                       where the iron either smashed or carried away the bone completely. The skin closed over it, but
                   for eleven years, Phineas had a real hole in his head .
                  22           At last, the true story of Phineas Gage is out in the open. The scientific debate about
                       the brain, though, has moved on. The theories of the Localizers and Whole Brainers are being
                    replaced by a new experimental brain science. In time, the pinpointing of control areas will
                     become more and more detailed. Knowledge of cells in general and neurons in particular will
                     transform understanding of the brain. Yet the truth about Phineas poses a question that no one
                       seems eager to answer. If there are exact locations in the brain that allow for the ability to hear
           
                   or to breathe, is there a place that generates human social behavior? If that place is damaged, do
                      you stop acting human?

           
              1    In our time, Phineas Gage is a textbook case. Students of neurology or psychology study his case
           

                       because it illustrates how the lobes ofthe frontal cortex-the two halves of your brain that meet
           


                 in your forehead-are the seat of "executive functions. " Those are your abilities to predict, to
         
                       decide, and to interact socially.
 
              2            Unfortunately, Phineas is not the only person to have suffered damage to the frontal


 
                    cortex. Antonio and Hanna Damasio, a husband-and-wife team of doctors, regularly see
                       people who remind them of Phineas Gage. The Damasios are renowned brain researchers at
                   the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics in Iowa City and treat patients with the same kind of


              frontal lobe damage that afflicted Phineas. Like Phineas, these patients with frontal lobe damage
              have trouble making decisions. Like Phineas with his S1, 000 pebbles, they perform well on logic
              and math tests but make strange choices in trading situations. Their emotional responses are
              unpredictable. They seem out of step emotionally with the rest of the world.
    3                 The patients who come to the Damasios' clinic are not victims of blasting accidents. Their
              brain injuries usually follow surgery to remove a tumor from deep inside the frontal cortex. This
              kind of brain surgery is strictly a last resort to save a patient's life, because even if the operation
              goes well, the risk of side effects is high. Any damage to the frontal cortex can change behavior
              and personality forever, as the case of Phineas Gage demonstrates. Sometimes, cancer surgeons
              have no other choice. These cases are not common, but the Damasios have seen a dozen patients
              with many of the same symptoms as Phineas. All have frontal cortex damage. All have trouble
              making decisions on personal or social matters. All react with little empathy and seem to find
              emotion a foreign language.
    4                 To study these modern-day Phineases, the Damasios have far more sophisticated
              equipment than Dr. Harlow did. They have the full arsenal of CTs and MRIs-noninvasive brain
              scanners that can electronically "slice up" a brain and lay it out, level by level, like the floor plan
              of a house. But the Damasios also do simpler tests. Emotional response is difficult to measure,
              but there is one usually reliable sign of how you are feeling-sweaty palms. When your emotions
              are "aroused," your skin (all over and not just your palms) gets slightly warmer and slightly
              sweatier. Your sweat contains salts, which increase electrical conductivity. A person having a
              strong emotional reaction is going to "spike" a conductivity meter. It's the same principle used in
              the police "lie detector" test, only the Damasios are interested in a different sort of truth.
    5                 Hooked to a skin response machine, the modern-day Phineases are shown a series of
              emotionally charged pictures-a tranquil landscape, a beautiful woman, a severed foot. Their
              skin reactions are usually the same-nearly flat. The emotional colors of their world seem to
              have drained away. Another Damasio experiment involves a computer "gambling" game. There
              are four decks: A, B, C, and D. The decks are rigged. Normal subjects who play the game soon
              figure out that the C and D decks are better risks than A and B. The modern-day Phineases keep
              playing A and B, though they can explain to the experimenters mathematically exactly why C
              and D are better risks. They realize the game is rigged to favor a "slow but steady" strategy against
              a "risk-all" strategy, but they still play "risk-all." Call them Phineas's rules.
    6                 So what part of the brain controls this behavior? Dr. Harlow thought he had found the
              precise location of Phineas's troubles once he had the skull. By then, Phineas's actual brain was
              long gone, but Dr. Harlow knew enough gross anatomy to calculate that the iron had passed
              through the very front of the left frontal cortex. His answer was good enough for 1868. It isn't
              good enough today.

         This is a "coronal" MRI. Instead of a side view, this is a slice of the brain taken head-on. Here we're somewhere in the middle of
             the head with the cortex above, the corpus callosum in the middle, and the brain stem descending to the spinal column. MRI
                                                    brain scan by G. Tompkinson, Photo Researchers Inc.


         7                  Studying the brain scans ofthese Phineas-like patients, the Damasios wonder what a

                 brain scan of Phineas Gage himself would have shown. In 1994, Hanna Damasio has an idea of
                    how to construct one retroactively. First she asks Dr. Albert Galaburda at the Harvard Medical
                 School to have another look at Phineas's skull in the Harvard medical museum. Under the
                    careful eye of the curators, Dr. Galaburda x-rays, photographs, and remeasures the skull. The
                    results are digitized so the specifics of Phineas's skull can be overlaid onto a three-dimensional

                  computer image of a generic human skull. Back in her lab in Iowa, Hanna Damasio carefully
                    plots the entrance and exit wounds. A line is drawn between their center point to layout a
                    hypothetical path for the tamping iron. The generic electronic skull is then adjusted to Phineas's
                    specifications. Now Dr. Damasio has Phineas's skull on a computer screen. She can tilt and
                    rotate it in any direction exactly as if she were holding it in her hand.

         8                  Then she adds the tamping iron electronically. The real one tapers, but the electronic
                    one is represented as a cylinder as big around as the fat end ofthe tamping iron. Now Dr.
                    Damasio turns to a computer program called Brainvox that is used to reassemble brain scan

                    "slices" into a three-dimensional model. Brainvox fits this electronically scanned brain inside
                    Phineas's electronic skull.
         9                  The brain is a very small place, and a very small change in the path of the iron would
                have had very different results. Brainvox calculates sixteen possible paths for the iron to follow
                    through Phineas's head. The anatomical evidence from Phineas rules out nine of these. Dr.
                    Damasio knows that the iron missed his jawbone, lightly clipped the interior arch of his brow,
                    and knocked out one molar but didn't destroy the socket. Any path that falls outside those
                    landmarks is out of bounds. Of the remaining seven routes, two would have cut important

                             



               blood vessels and would have killed Phineas instantly. Brainvox lays out the last five routes. The
               Damasio team whittles it down to one.
    10                  Brainvox plots it as a red cylinder passing through the animated computer skull. The top
               ofthe skull is open to show the rod emerging from the frontal cortex. It is a riveting image. The
               scientific journal Science puts Brainvox's images of the pierced skull on its cover and it causes a
               sensation. Whether you're a brain surgeon or a sixth-grader, the first time you see the Brainvox
               image of Phineas's head with that red bar through it, you wince.
    11                  If you study the animated skull from different angles, you can see Phineas's incredible
               luck. The iron passes through his head at a very steep angle. That's both his salvation and his
               ruin. It misses a number of key areas on the side and top of the brain. On.the left temple, it
               misses Broca's area for speech. On top, it misses two key sections of the cortex, the motor and
               somatosensory strips. These areas integrate your sensory input and muscle actions so you keep
               oriented in space and in motion. Thus Phineas is left with the ability to keep his balance, to focus
               his attention, and to remember both old and new events.
    12                  The tamping iron, however, plows on through his frontal lobes, passing through the
               middle, where the two hemispheres face each other. The iron damages the left hemisphere more
               than the right, the front of the frontal cortex more than the back, the underside more than the
               top. Dr. Damasio recognizes the pattern. Phineas's reconstructed brain matches brain scans of
               her patients who had cortex tumor surgery.
    13                  Humans have always argued about what makes us human. Is it our ability to walk on two
               feet? To hold tools in our hands? To speak and hear language? To worship a supreme being? The
               case of Phineas Gage suggests that we are human because our frontal lobes are set up so we can
               get along with other humans. We are "hard wired" to be sociable. When we lose that ability, we
               end up like Phineas. His closest companion was an iron rod.


         The skull of Phineas Gage appeared on the cover of the journal Science. Generated by computer, the red bar plots the exact path

         of the tamping iron through his frontal cortex. From Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Galaburda, A. M., "The return of Phineas Gage: Clues from
                the brain of a famous patient, " Science, 264: 11 02-1156, 1994. Department ofImage Analysis Facility, University of Iowa .
                           Reprinted with permission of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 1994
                                                                                                                                
                What is so remarkable about Phineas Gage's injury is not only where the rod went in his head but where it did not go. The
              tamping iron missed a number of key areas on either side of the brain that control important functions, including Broca's and
                                    Wernicke's areas, plus the motor strip and the somatosensory strip. Illustration by Jerry Malone



                 Look closely to read the inscription on the famous iron: "This is the bar that was shot through the head of Mr. Phineas
              Gage at Cavendish, Vermont, Sept. 14, 1848. He fully recovered from the injury and deposited this bar in the museum
              of the Medical College of Harvard University. " Someone-either Dr. Harlow or the engraver-got the date wrong. The
                accident was on September 13, not 14. Photograph by Doug Mindel!; tamping iron courtesy of the Countway Library of Medicine,
                                                                   Harvard Medical School


         14               The tamping iron and skull of Phineas have a new home at Harvard Medical School in
                  Boston. After 150 years on display just outside the dean's office in the medical school, they were
                  cleaned up and moved in 2000 to a new exhibit case in the Countway Library of Medicine just
                  down Shattuck Street. !fyou want to see Phineas, you have to ask permission at the library's
                  front desk, but generally they will send you straight up to the fifth floor, where Phineas resides
                  in Harvard's collection of medical curiosities.
         15               The Harvard curators say that other museums, such as the Smithsonian Institution,
                  are constantly asking to borrow Phineas's skull and iron, but his traveling days are over. The
                  last time he was lent for exhibit in 1998, he came back with a loosened tooth. That year,
                  Phineas went in the back seat of a limousine to Cavendish, Vermont, for a festival and medical
                  seminar to mark the 150th anniversary of his terrible accident. Psychologists, surgeons, and
                  neurologists came from all over the world to present scientific papers on frontal cortex injuries.
                  Also on hand were men and women in wheelchairs who suffer from cortex injury or disease.
                  To these special attendees, Phineas was no specimen or historical curiosity. He was a fellow
                  sufferer.

    16                   At the end ofthe celebration, the town unveiled a boulder of Vermont granite on the
                 village green with a bronze plaque as a permanent memorial to Phineas. If you go to Vermont,
                 you can read it yourself. It explains what happened in Cavendish, what happened to Phineas,
                 and what happened to Dr. Harlow. It explains what happened to our knowledge of the brain as a
                 result.




        In 1998, one hundred and fifty years after his terrible accident, the town of Cavendish, Vermont, held a medical seminar and
        festival to honor Phineas Gage. The climax was the dedication of a memorial plaque explaining what had happened to Phineas
                                             and to brain science as a result. Photograph by Amy Flynn




          This Concord stagecoach ended its days in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, Africa, far from the New Hampshire factory where it was
    made. Phineas Gage ended his days in San Francisco, far from New Hampshire, where he was born; far from Vermont, where he
               was injured; and far from Chile, where he drove a Concord stagecoach like this one. New Hampshire Historical Society

       17           The plaque does not answer the question of Phineas's luck. I said at the beginning that
            you could decide for yourself what kind of luck he had at the end. This is what I think: Phineas
            Gage was lucky. His accident was terrible. It changed him into someone else, and yet Phineas
            figured out how to live as that new person for eleven years. He was limited in ways that are
            important to all human beings, but he found a way to live, working with horses. He took care of
            himself. He saw the world. He died with his family around him, the only people who knew both
            the old and new Phineas. And he drove a six-horse stagecoach. I bet Phineas Gage drove fast .



GLOSSARY




       Glossary

       abscess-a swollen pocket in tissue where dead bacteria and immune cells collect during an
                infection.
                                                                                                               
       aphasia-the inability to speak, usually caused by injury or disease affecting Broca's area on the
                                                                                                               
                brain's frontal lobe.                                                                          
       bacteria-one-celled microorganisms that thrive in virtually every environment on earth, as              
                well as within larger organisms. Bacteria perform a wide variety of actions beneficial         
                to humans, from decomposing organic matter to leavening bread. Only a small                    
                percentage of species are pathogenic, that is, capable of causing disease in humans.           
       brain stem-the bottom part of the brain that links to the spinal cord and controls such
                involuntary functions as breathing, heart rate, and reflex reactions.                          
       cadaver-a dead body donated for dissection.                                                             
       carbolic acid-a strong, corrosive chemical poison once used as a disinfectant.                          

       cerebellum-the part ofthe brain located at the back of the head beneath the occipital lobe that
                regulates involuntary muscles controlling balance and muscle tension.
       corpus callosum-a bundle of neurons that connects the left and right hemispheres of the cortex.
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               

                                                                                                               
       daguerreotype-an early photographic process that created a positive image on a metal plate,
                                                                                                               
                replaced in the 1860s by glass plate and colloid films that produced negatives.
       derrick-a crane for lifting heavy objects.                                                              
       electroencephalograph (EEGJ-an instrument that traces electrical patterns in the brain.
       epilepsy-a seizure disorder caused by breakdowns in the natural electrical patterns of the brain.
       ether-Ethers are a class of organic compounds, but the "ether" used in the first anesthesia
                operations was an ether of sulfuric acid and ethyl alcohol. The fumes quickly put surgical
                                                                                                               
                patients to sleep, but this ether also had a tendency to stop their breathing completely. It
                                                                                                               
                was quickly replaced by less dangerous chemicals.                                              
       fermentation-the breakdown by living yeast bacteria of natural sugars into alcohol and carbon           
                dioxide.                                                                                       
       frontal lobe-the part ofthe cortex at the front ofthe brain.
       gangrene-a life-threatening infection occurring when dead and dying tissue close off the
                circulation of blood to limbs.
       hypothermia-a physiological state in which body temperature falls well below normal.
       interhemispheric fissure-the space that divides the left and right hemispheres of the cortex.
       microorganisms-extremely small living things composed of one or a few cells that can be seen
                only through a microscope.
       neuron-a nerve cell that transmits electrical or chemical impulses.
       neurotransmitters-chemical signals that carry nerve impulses across the synapses between
                neurons.
       occipital lobe-the part of the cortex at the back ofthe head.
       parietal lobe-the middle portion of the cortex at the top ofthe head.
       Pasteur's germ theory-After proving that fermentation and decay were the work of living
                microscopic organisms, Louis Pasteur discovered that many diseases are caused by living
                pathogenic bacteria that he called germs.

        penicillin-the first widely used antibiotic that halted infections by attacking pathogenic
                bacteria. It is produced naturally by a kind of common green bread mold.
        phrenology-the elaboration of Josef Gall's original idea that brain functions were highly
                localized. Phrenology grew into an elaborate pseudoscience that divined human
                intelligence by reading bumps and dips on the head.
        receptive aphasia-the inability to understand speech, usually the result of brain damage to
                Wernicke's area on the temporal lobe of the cortex.
        seizure-a sudden, involuntary contraction of the muscles usually caused by a disruption of the
                normal electrical patterns of the brain. A seizure is a symptom, not a disease in itself.
        sepsis-a severe bacterial infection.
        spinal cord-the tract carrying the nerves from the brain stem to the rest of the body. It is
                protected by a flexible backbone of separate vertebrae. Animals with spinal cords,
                including humans, are called vertebrates.
        staphylococci-a large tribe of related bacteria. They are pathogenic, meaning they cause
                disease, usually through wound infections or food poisoning.
        streptococci-another large family of pathogenic bacteria that can infect, among other systems,
                the lungs and the digestive tract. When strep infects red blood cells, it can cause scarlet
                and rheumatic fevers.
        synapse-the tiny space between the axon of one neuron and the connecting dendrite of another.
                Synapses are bridged by chemical messengers called neurotransmitters.
        tamping iron-similar in appearance to a crowbar, a tamping iron was a specialized tool for
                gunpowder blasting in construction work before the invention of dynamite.
        temporal lobe-the part of the cortex on the side of the head.
