NARRATOR 1: The story you are about to hear is one of homesickness and hardship and the lengths one man took to reach his wife and family. 
NARRATOR 2: The main character in our story is the mastermind behind the wooden horse and the Greeks’ final assault in the ten-year war against Troy. Odysseus, King of Ithaka, spends an additional ten years trying to return home. 
NARRATOR 1: Let’s look in on Penelope, shining among women, and Telemachus, on their island home. 
PENELOPE: My son, your father would not wish you to trouble yourself so. TELEMACHUS: Dear mother, father may not have wanted me to be troubled, but he would want me to defend your honor and our home.
PENELOPE: So like him you are. I am sure he will return, and when he does he will be proud of how well you’ve cared for me. You were just a boy when he went with the Greek forces to fight Troy.
TELEMACHUS: The suitors are anxious to take your hand in marriage and ask daily how long before you finish your glorious tapestry.
PENELOPE: Telemachus, you must assure them that  I am working with great care to prepare a burial shroud worthy of the body of the great hero Laertes, your grandfather. When the cloth is complete and the lengths of colored wool are spent, I will surrender myself to the worthiest man who pays court in my palace.  
TELEMACHUS: As you wish, mother. 
PENELOPE: Forgive me, brave Telemachus. I must return to my loom. 
NARRATOR 2: And with that, faithful Penelope, sits down at her loom and resumes work on the tapestry. 
NARRATOR 1: The goddess Athena, watching from Olympus, reveals herself to the sad young Telemachus. (Athena appears.) 
ATHENA: Telemachus, worthy son of great Odysseus, it is true your father would wish for your strength of wit and might to restore your mother’s honor. 
TELEMACHUS: Grey-eyed Athena, wise protector of my father, for what purpose have you come to me? 
ATHENA: Telemachus, you must journey far and wide and learn news of your father. Be guided by me, and all that can be done to bring Odysseus home will be revealed to you. 
TELEMACHUS: Lead me, great lady, and I will follow. 
ATHENA: First, you must speak to the suitors. Gather them together in an assembly and demand that they leave this place.  
TELEMACHUS: Taking leave of the palace would spare what little stores remain. For four years now they have eaten all our food and drunk all our wine. If my father ever returns, there will be nothing left of his kingdom. 
ATHENA: His kingdom lies in his lovely wife, Penelope, and you, his splendid son. After you have addressed these noblemen, gather all of your wits, for you must journey across the seas. 
NARRATOR 2: With that, Athena returns to Mount Olympus to watch her scheme unfold.
(Enter suitors.)
TELEMACHUS: Worthy men, take leave of our household, for I fear our supplies are nearly wasted. Take turns feasting at your own palaces until my mother’s mind has settled and she finishes the woven burial shroud for my grandfather. 
SUITOR 1: How dare you speak to your guests in such a way! 
SUITOR 2: Telemachus, the bold manner in which you speak makes me believe you are being guided by the gods. 
SUITOR 3: We have been told by your mother that she will choose one of us when she finishes the tapestry, but she’s been weaving for years.
SUITOR 4: And we have just learned that each night she unravels that which she has woven by day! 
TELEMACHUS: If you do not leave, may the great Zeus resolve this matter against you. 
SUITOR 5: We will leave here. But we await word from your wise, gentle, and . . . clever mother. 
NARRATOR 1: The men leave the palace, and Telemachus outfits a ship for his journey of discovery.