NARRATOR 2: When Dawn shows herself again with her rosy fingers, Odysseus and his men are well on a new leg of their journey, their sails full of Circe’s last gift. 
EURYLOCHUS: Odysseus, the men are restless and demand to know what direction we will take. 
SOLDIER 1: We sense something. 
ODYSSEUS: Once again, I must ask you to have complete faith in me. Do as I say, don’t ask questions, and we will survive another day. 
SOLDIER 2: We have learned our lesson. When our trust in you flagged, we released the power of the winds and lost sight of our homes. 
SOLDIER 3: Never again will we doubt you. 
ODYSSEUS: Circe, bright among goddesses, warned of the danger ahead. We must follow her instructions precisely. Melt down this wax and put it in your ears. Very soon we will see a sight too beautiful to behold and hear sweet music too lovely to bear.  And more danger lies beyond. 
SOLDIER 4: What about you, Odysseus? 
ODYSSEUS: You must tie me to the mast. Bind me hand and foot so that I am unable to unloosen myself.
SOLDIER 5: We will do as you say. 
ODYSSEUS: And whatever you do, do not under any circumstances free me. Do you understand? 
NARRATOR 1: So the men set about plugging their ears with wax and lashing their leader to the mast. 
NARRATOR 2: And soon after, the bright sun comes from behind a cloud, and illuminates a rolling meadow on a coastline in which sit five stately maidens combing their long shining tresses. Before them on the beach is a boneyard of unfortunate sailors. 
NARRATOR 1: The men, awestruck with the beauty before them, move to the edge of the ship and lean into the wind, hoping to pick up the fragrance of the enchantresses.
SIREN 1: Come, brave wayfarers. We are the Sirens, our song is so sweet, none can resist. 
SIREN 2: Our beauty surpasses any you have encountered. 
SIREN 3: Or ever will encounter in your lifetime. 
NARRATOR 2: And though the men can not hear them, they are indeed tempted. Odysseus stands firm against the mast but is visibly shaken. 
SIREN 4: Sing, sisters, your sweet song of sorrow and loss. 
SIREN 5: Take pity on these unlucky wayfarers and bring them comfort such as they might have in their own homes by their own hearths, and with their own families. 
NARRATOR 1: With these last words, Odysseus feels his heart sink, and he relaxes his shoulders to give in to their power, and the sirens begin to sing ancient notes unknown to mortal man. 
ODYSSEUS: The pain is all-consuming. Never before have I heard such lilting airs. Aaah! The beauty is too much to take. Eurylochus, unbind me so that my body might give up my spirit to reside here forever. 
NARRATOR 2: But Eurylochus and the others pay him no heed, for their ears are prevented from hearing the great wailing melody of longing and sacrifice. 
NARRATOR 1: Their oars dip furiously into the sea and they row for an eternity while Odysseus, lashes about, tied to the mast, awestruck with the dangerous beauty he experienced. 
EURYLOCHUS: We have escaped without a loss. Untie Odysseus, unplug your ears.  ODYSSEUS: We are at a safe distance, and once more we are spared. But I fear a most unfortunate challenge lies ahead. All oarsmen must determine to sail straight on between those two great rocks up ahead. Neither veer to the left nor to the right, but stay steady center. 
EURYLOCHUS: The rocky crags stick out of the water like pottery shards! We’ll never make it! 
NARRATOR 2: To the best of their abilities, the men obey. Leaning hard into the oars to steer the ship, the men look ahead to the churning choppy waves and the narrow passage through which they must navigate. 
SOLDIER 1: Steady your arms! 
ODYSSEUS: Charybdis, the fathomless whirlpool on one side, and Scylla, the monster of unimaginable horrors, on the other. 
SOLDIER 2: On your left—watch out! 
SOLDIER 3: We’re veering off course! Lean into the oars. 
SOLDIER 4: Steady! 
SOLDIER 5: To the right! To the right! 
NARRATOR 2: The waves churn and slap against the prow, and the whirlpool Charybdis threatens to suck them down. The oarsmen direct the ship closer to the dark-pegged, stoney chasm when . . . 
NARRATOR 1: Out of a deep black cave emerges Scylla, a monster of such horror that half the men drop their oars. But they are much too slow to escape from her six swift heads, each possessing three rows of razor-sharp teeth. Odysseus loses one man for each of her horrible heads. 
ODYSSEUS: Beware of the swell! Hang on! 
SOLDIER 1: A great hole in the sea is sucking us down!  
NARRATOR 2: And the ship is lost as the waves swallow up the last of the crew and the hard-got bounty of Troy. And then, silence . . . 
NARRATOR 1: Until finally a single man is spit up, and Odysseus is, yet again, washed ashore in a foreign land . . . and is, yet again, found by a lovely woman.
CALYPSO: I am Calypso. You must be Odysseus. You are weary. There is no need to go further. I will care for you.
