NARRATOR 2: The first stop on the journey is the island of Pylos and the house of Nestor, a distinguished figure who fought at Troy. 
NARRATOR 1: Nestor, great counsel to commanders of armies, gives much hospitality to Telemachus. 
NARRATOR 2: At the banquet, stories are told of great tragedy and greater victory, and bread and wine and meats are eaten. (Actors play at banqueting.) 
NESTOR: Great-hearted Telemachus, take these fine horses and chariot. You will surely hear news of your father if you visit the palace of fair-haired Menelaus. My sons will escort you to his kingdom. 
(Actors shake hands all around. Athena and Telemachus leave.) 
ATHENA: Telemachus, shining among men, we will come to Menelaus on a great day. His daughter and son are to be wedded away to neighboring kingdoms. Much rejoicing can be heard in the streets and marble passages of the palace. 
TELEMACHUS: Will Helen, the face that launched a thousand ships, be there, who took so many men from their homes, including my own dear father? 
ATHENA: Helen will be there. I must not go, so great is my anger. Aphrodite, bright-haired and shining, was deemed fairest by Paris, who then won Helen. The Trojan War began with this judgment—so simple, so swift, and yet the conflict lasted ten years.  I leave you, Telemachus, with the sons of Nestor. 
TELEMACHUS: Continue to guide me, grey-eyed goddess. (Athena leaves.) 
NARRATOR 1: Telemachus and the sons of Nestor are received warmly, as all strangers are. Bathed, anointed with fragrant oils, and rested, the travelers now come to another great banquet. 
MENELAUS: Come, weary travelers, sit among my family, and feast with us. 
HELEN: Husband, this young man resembles one you know. In movement, body, and speech, he is the same. The clever Odysseus had a son named Telemachus. 
MENELAUS: Are you the son of the crafty Odysseus? 
TELEMACHUS: Yes, I have not looked upon his face for nearly twenty years. I was no more than a babe when he left our home in Ithaka. 
HELEN: Ithaka is the island kingdom from whence Odysseus came. What of your mother, the queen? 
TELEMACHUS: My mother waits patiently for his return, but I fear time is running out. Suitors are waiting for her to marry again. They stay in our palace and eat our food, and the queen is weary and heartbroken. 
NARRATOR 1: Telemachus tells them all he can of the men who spoiled have his house and worried his mother. 
NARRATOR 2: Helen, long sorry for her role in such loss, is melted and wishes to help in any way she can. 
MENELAUS: How is it we can help you? 
TELEMACHUS: I come from the house of Nestor, where I heard that you saw a great many lands. Perhaps you have heard something of my father. 
MENELAUS: Yes, I heard many foreign tongues and our return to Sparta was eight years in coming.
NARRATOR 1: Menelaus tells of their sojourn and of the anger of the gods against them and how they were blown back from advancing, time and again, and how they thought they would never reach home.
NARRATOR 2: And he tells of the murder of his brother, Agamemnon, by Aegisthus. And of the involvement of Clytemnestra, Agamemnon’s queen, who had taken Aegisthus as a new husband. 
MENELAUS: These things are terrible to hear. The news you seek is of your father. And I will tell you the last I heard of Odysseus. He was being held captive by the nymph Calypso in her island palace. 
TELEMACHUS: May greatness continue to be your reward, Menelaus, for you have fired my spirit. 
NARRATOR 1: And Telemachus stays not much longer and comes to announce his departure.   
TELEMACHUS: Menelaus and Helen, your hospitality has fitted me up to continue my search. I leave you with these fine horses since you have vast and fertile meadows and in my home of Ithaka we have ground only fit for goats and not for the grazing of horses. Please keep them. 
MENELAUS: And to you, I give this parting gift. A great mixing bowl of silver, with a rim of pure gold— forged by Hephaestus himself, god of fire and metal. Blessings on your journey. 
