SCENE 7:
NARRATOR 1: After three days the ship takes refuge in a calm lagoon.  
NARRATOR 2: With fresh water and food uppermost in their minds, Odysseus sends out a search party. And much time passes before Eurylochus, in charge of the scouts, returns to the black ship, alone. 
ODYSSEUS: Eurylochus, you are alone. Where are the others? 
EURYLOCHUS: Sir, we came upon a palace in the forest. And in that palace sat a beautiful lady, maybe a goddess. She sat weaving and singing at a great loom and opened her doors to us in an invitation. 
ODYSSEUS: How were you treated? 
EURYLOCHUS: I was suspicious and stayed in her courtyard, but the others went in. I could see the men seated at a great banquet, and they laughed and ate and drank, but then they disappeared.
ODYSSEUS: My sword and my arrows may be of no use, but we must prepare for a fight. 
NARRATOR 1: And in that instant Hermes, the messenger of the gods, appeared. HERMES: You are right, Odysseus. Your might will be no use here. You have need of powers greater than you possess. Take this flower, the substance of which will protect you from her magical powers.  
ODYSSEUS: Of whom do you speak?
HERMES: You are on the island of the goddess Circe of the lovely hair, daughter of Helios and granddaughter of Ocean. Her charms are infinite, and mortal men have no defense against her. The juice of this flower will allow you to resist. 
ODYSSEUS: Hermes, the messenger of the gods, direct me so that I might save my men and reunite them with their families at Ithaka. 
NARRATOR 1: Hermes leans close to Odysseus and speaks of the plan in his ear. 
NARRATOR 2: Through willow glen and wild olive, Odysseus makes his way to the garden and palace of Circe. 
ODYSSEUS: Circe, daughter of Helios, I have come to retrieve the crew of my ship. 
NARRATOR 1: Circe, who has been weaving colorful images of naiads and dolphins and sea stars, rises from her loom and walks out into the twilight garden. 
CIRCE: Sea-stained warrior, what is it you wish of me? 
ODYSSEUS: I wish you to return my men so that we may continue our journey homeward. 
CIRCE: Wandering stranger, what you wish is impossible. Your companions have been transformed. 
NARRATOR 2: And with that, Circe gestures to an enclosure in the garden where a dozen swine look on helplessly. 
CIRCE: Your friends are being taken care of and have more nourishing food in their bellies than they will ever receive with you. 
ODYSSEUS: You’ve turned them into pigs and wish me to show gratitude? 
CIRCE: It would please me if you would relax and enjoy my company. Enter my palace and dine with me.
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus, ever mindful of the directions given to him by Hermes, follows Circe into her shining palace. 
CIRCE: Stranger, sit and I will pour you a beverage that will restore your strength and hope. 
NARRATOR 2: But to this beverage, Circe adds a magic potion and sets it down before him in a golden cup. 
CIRCE: Drink, great warrior.
NARRATOR 1: And Odysseus drinks from the goblet. When he is finished he looks her in the eyes. 
CIRCE: I touch you with my wand, yet you are unaffected by my magic. You must be Odysseus, son of Laertes and seed of Zeus. I have long awaited your arrival.  
NARRATOR 2: But Odysseus unsheathes his sword and holds it to her throat.  
ODYSSEUS: Lovely enchantress, swear to me that you will treat me honorably like all guests should be and that no harm or evil will come to me through your wiles. 
CIRCE: Resourceful Odysseus, teller of tales and warrior strong, to you only will I make such an oath. I swear no harm or evil will come to you. 
NARRATOR 1: And with her promise, Odysseus puts away his sword and returns to the table, his mind distracted and his mood full of darkness. 
CIRCE: Will you not eat? 
ODYSSEUS: How can I eat when my heart is heavy with the tragedy that has befallen my friends? 
CIRCE: If it will please you, I will return them to human form. 
NARRATOR 2: Circe the enchantress touches each pig with her wand and they are transformed. 
CIRCE: Notice, Odysseus, that your friends are younger and taller and more pleasing to behold than before. In good faith, I will help you. But stay awhile.  
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus is exceedingly fond of her and the tension in him is gone. 
ODYSSEUS: Goddess, bind our wounds and make us well again. Our spirits and bodies are broken. 
NARRATOR 2: And the seasons change and a year pass, and the hearts of the men turn once again, achingly, to their homeland.  
ODYSSEUS: Circe, well you have prepared us for our journey. But now, we must leave you. 
CIRCE: It is time. My magic will fill your sails and speed you on your way. Goodbye, great warrior. 
NARRATOR 1: They embrace one last time before Odysseus leads his men down to the beach and back on the black ship. 