
The Odyssey (Scenes 1-2) begin at 9:45
The Telemachy 
(in which Telemachus searches for his father)

SCENE 1:
NARRATOR 1: The story you are about to hear is one of homesickness and hardship and the lengths one man took to reach his wife and family. 
NARRATOR 2: The main character in our story is the mastermind behind the wooden horse and the Greeks’ final assault in the ten-year war against Troy. Odysseus, King of Ithaka, spends an additional ten years trying to return home. 
NARRATOR 1: Let’s look in on Penelope, shining among women, and Telemachus, on their island home. 
PENELOPE: My son, your father would not wish you to trouble yourself so. TELEMACHUS: Dear mother, father may not have wanted me to be troubled, but he would want me to defend your honor and our home.
PENELOPE: So like him you are. I am sure he will return, and when he does he will be proud of how well you’ve cared for me. You were just a boy when he went with the Greek forces to fight Troy.
TELEMACHUS: The suitors are anxious to take your hand in marriage and ask daily how long before you finish your glorious tapestry.
PENELOPE: Telemachus, you must assure them that  I am working with great care to prepare a burial shroud worthy of the body of the great hero Laertes, your grandfather. When the cloth is complete and the lengths of colored wool are spent, I will surrender myself to the worthiest man who pays court in my palace.  
TELEMACHUS: As you wish, mother. 
PENELOPE: Forgive me, brave Telemachus. I must return to my loom. 
NARRATOR 2: And with that, faithful Penelope, sits down at her loom and resumes work on the tapestry. 
NARRATOR 1: The goddess Athena, watching from Olympus, reveals herself to the sad young Telemachus. (Athena appears.) 
ATHENA: Telemachus, worthy son of great Odysseus, it is true your father would wish for your strength of wit and might to restore your mother’s honor. 
TELEMACHUS: Grey-eyed Athena, wise protector of my father, for what purpose have you come to me? 
ATHENA: Telemachus, you must journey far and wide and learn news of your father. Be guided by me, and all that can be done to bring Odysseus home will be revealed to you. 
TELEMACHUS: Lead me, great lady, and I will follow. 
ATHENA: First, you must speak to the suitors. Gather them together in an assembly and demand that they leave this place.  
TELEMACHUS: Taking leave of the palace would spare what little stores remain. For four years now they have eaten all our food and drunk all our wine. If my father ever returns, there will be nothing left of his kingdom. 
ATHENA: His kingdom lies in his lovely wife, Penelope, and you, his splendid son.
After you have addressed these noblemen, gather all of your wits, for you must journey across the seas. 
NARRATOR 2: With that, Athena returns to Mount Olympus to watch her scheme unfold.
(Enter suitors.)
TELEMACHUS: Worthy men, take leave of our household, for I fear our supplies are nearly wasted. Take turns feasting at your own palaces until my mother’s mind has settled and she finishes the woven burial shroud for my grandfather. 
SUITOR 1: How dare you speak to your guests in such a way! 
SUITOR 2: Telemachus, the bold manner in which you speak makes me believe you are being guided by the gods. 
SUITOR 3: We have been told by your mother that she will choose one of us when she finishes the tapestry, but she’s been weaving for years.
SUITOR 4: And we have just learned that each night she unravels that which she has woven by day! 
TELEMACHUS: If you do not leave, may the great Zeus resolve this matter against you. 
SUITOR 5: We will leave here. But we await word from your wise, gentle, and . . . clever mother. 
NARRATOR 1: The men leave the palace, and Telemachus outfits a ship for his journey of discovery.

SCENE 2:
NARRATOR 2: The first stop on the journey is the island of Pylos and the house of Nestor, a distinguished figure who fought at Troy. 
NARRATOR 1: Nestor, great counsel to commanders of armies, gives much hospitality to Telemachus. 
NARRATOR 2: At the banquet, stories are told of great tragedy and greater victory, and bread and wine and meats are eaten. (Actors play at banqueting.) 
NESTOR: Great-hearted Telemachus, take these fine horses and chariot. You will surely hear news of your father if you visit the palace of fair-haired Menelaus. My sons will escort you to his kingdom. 
(Actors shake hands all around. Athena and Telemachus leave.) 
ATHENA: Telemachus, shining among men, we will come to Menelaus on a great day. His daughter and son are to be wedded away to neighboring kingdoms. Much rejoicing can be heard in the streets and marble passages of the palace. 
TELEMACHUS: Will Helen, the face that launched a thousand ships, be there, who took so many men from their homes, including my own dear father? 
ATHENA: Helen will be there. I must not go, so great is my anger. Aphrodite, bright-haired and shining, was deemed fairest by Paris, who then won Helen. The Trojan War began with this judgment—so simple, so swift, and yet the conflict lasted ten years.  I leave you, Telemachus, with the sons of Nestor. 
TELEMACHUS: Continue to guide me, grey-eyed goddess. (Athena leaves.) 
NARRATOR 1: Telemachus and the sons of Nestor are received warmly, as all strangers are. Bathed, anointed with fragrant oils, and rested, the travelers now come to another great banquet. 
MENELAUS: Come, weary travelers, sit among my family, and feast with us. 
HELEN: Husband, this young man resembles one you know. In movement, body, and speech, he is the same. The clever Odysseus had a son named Telemachus. 
MENELAUS: Are you the son of the crafty Odysseus? 
TELEMACHUS: Yes, I have not looked upon his face for nearly twenty years. I was no more than a babe when he left our home in Ithaka. 
HELEN: Ithaka is the island kingdom from whence Odysseus came. What of your mother, the queen? 
TELEMACHUS: My mother waits patiently for his return, but I fear time is running out. Suitors are waiting for her to marry again. They stay in our palace and eat our food, and the queen is weary and heartbroken. 
NARRATOR 1: Telemachus tells them all he can of the men who spoiled have his house and worried his mother. 
NARRATOR 2: Helen, long sorry for her role in such loss, is melted and wishes to help in any way she can. 
MENELAUS: How is it we can help you? 
TELEMACHUS: I come from the house of Nestor, where I heard that you saw a great many lands. Perhaps you have heard something of my father. 
MENELAUS: Yes, I heard many foreign tongues and our return to Sparta was eight years in coming.
NARRATOR 1: Menelaus tells of their sojourn and of the anger of the gods against them and how they were blown back from advancing, time and again, and how they thought they would never reach home.
NARRATOR 2: And he tells of the murder of his brother, Agamemnon, by Aegisthus. And of the involvement of Clytemnestra, Agamemnon’s queen, who had taken Aegisthus as a new husband. 
MENELAUS: These things are terrible to hear. The news you seek is of your father. And I will tell you the last I heard of Odysseus. He was being held captive by the nymph Calypso in her island palace. 
TELEMACHUS: May greatness continue to be your reward, Menelaus, for you have fired my spirit. 
NARRATOR 1: And Telemachus stays not much longer and comes to announce his departure.   
TELEMACHUS: Menelaus and Helen, your hospitality has fitted me up to continue my search. I leave you with these fine horses since you have vast and fertile meadows and in my home of Ithaka we have ground only fit for goats and not for the grazing of horses. Please keep them. 
MENELAUS: And to you, I give this parting gift. A great mixing bowl of silver, with a rim of pure gold— forged by Hephaestus himself, god of fire and metal. Blessings on your journey. 

The Odyssey (Scenes 3-4) begin at 6:16
The Wanderings 
(in which Odysseus tries to get home)
SCENE 3:
NARRATOR 2: Meanwhile, at that very moment, Odysseus is being tossed on the waves of the sea.
NARRATOR 1: For Poseidon, angry and bitter toward Odysseus, has long worked to keep him from his homeland. 
NARRATOR 2: But the sea goddess Ino saves the castaway and washes him ashore on the sands of Scheria.
NARRATOR 1: Here, Nausicaa, daughter of King Alkinoos, is with her handmaids, where the river meets the ocean, at a washing place to launder clothes. 
NAUSICAA: Take these baskets down to the water’s edge. When these linens are washed, lay them out on the rocks in the sunshine to dry. (Handmaids take the baskets.) 
HANDMAID 1: This is a good spot for our purposes. Down closer to the reeds. Let us walk to the edge.
HANDMAID 2 (sees Odysseus lying in the foliage): What is this? A man! Don’t go further! We must tell Nausicaa. (They run back to the princess.) 
HANDMAID 1: Nausicaa, go no further down this embankment. Come, away! 
NAUSICAA: What are you hiding down there? 
HANDMAID 2: Lady, there is a man down there in the reeds. Washed ashore by the waves. 
NAUSICAA: Surely we must see if he lives, and if he does, how we might help him. 
HANDMAID 1: Lady, please. 
HANDMAID 2: Don’t go, Nausicaa! Your mother the queen would not wish it!
NARRATOR 2: But Nausicaa of the white arms knows her own mind and goes down to the reeds to see the stranger. 
NARRATOR 1: When she sees him she draws back because of his battered and briny state, and from behind a rock she watches him as he lies there. 
NAUSICAA: Who are you, great man, who comes to the shores of my father? Are you hurt? 
ODYSSEUS: Who is there? I am Odysseus. And I don’t know where I am. 
NAUSICAA: We have food and drink in the mule cart. Please refresh yourself. 
NARRATOR 2: They join the handmaids at the mule cart.
NAUSICAA: Girls, fetch the box that mother packed with figs and cheese and wine.  
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus sits and eats hungrily because he hasn’t eaten in a long time. 
NAUSICAA: Odysseus, I invite you to the home of my father. But to avoid scandal, we will go ahead of you in the cart. When we are well on our way, go into the town and ask anyone to direct you to the palace of Alkinoos. 
ODYSSEUS: Fair lady, I will do as you say. 
NARRATOR 2: And Nausicaa and her handmaids take the mule cart back to the road and start home. 
NARRATOR 1: When Odysseus comes near to the town, Athena meets him. 
ATHENA: Friend, I will take you where it is you want to go. The kings inside this palace are feasting, but be bold and go inside, for bold moves are smart moves. 
ODYSSEUS: Great goddess, to whom should I speak? 
ATHENA: Address your cause directly to the lady of the house, Queen Arete, herself descended from the gods. The mist around you will prevent others from seeing you until such time as you wish to be seen. 
NARRATOR 2: Odysseus strides into the great hall, unseen. Then, wishing to be seen, he bows deeply at the feet of Queen Arete. 
ODYSSEUS: Oh, queen, I am a stranger and a wanderer in your land. At your mercy am I. Long have I wished to see the shores of my homeland and hope that you might help me. 
QUEEN ARETE: Stranger and friend, you are welcome here. Take a seat among the rulers of this land. 
KING ALKINOOS: Great warrior, such strength needs feeding. Please eat and drink, and when you are finished, the maidservants will draw a hot bath for you. Afterward, tell us the story of how you came here. 
NARRATOR 1: And Odysseus sits at the table in his chamber and eats great slabs of tender lamb and olives seasoned with lemon and rosemary. And when he finishes he leaves the chamber for the first hot bath since his time with Calypso. 

SCENE 4:
NARRATOR 2: Refreshed and comfortable, Odysseus returns to the great hall and gives the queen his voice and his story. 
NARRATOR 1: And so with rapt attention, the leaders of Scheria listen as the great warrior tells of his adventures and wanderings. 
NARRATOR 2: His story begins at the end of the reign of King Priam and the end of the Trojan kingdom. Odysseus, eager to make a crushing blow to end the long war, supervises the building of a hollow-bellied giant wooden horse and hides inside with a group of Greek soldiers. The Trojans think the horse is a gift and accept it since they see no sign of the Greek forces, who are hiding off the coast. 
NARRATOR 1: King Priam of Troy and his queen, Hecuba, bring it through the gates of Troy and into their city. After the evening of celebration has ended, the Greek soldiers sneak out of the horse, according to Odysseus’s plan. 
AGAMEMNON: You, soldier, light a fire to signal the ships that the time is at hand. 
MENELAUS: Soon, the forces will enter the walls and Troy will be destroyed. 
NARRATOR 2: The chiefs wait for the soldiers to arrive. 
NARRATOR 1: And when they do, Odysseus opens the gates to the sleeping city, lets in the other soldiers, and the carnage begins. 
AGAMEMNON: Round up the royal family. Burn the city so that nothing left standing is higher than my knee!  
NARRATOR 2: Death and destruction befall the ancient city of Troy, and it is razed to the ground. 
NARRATOR 1: Afterward, a funeral takes place for the great Achilles with a sacrifice on his tomb of the Trojan Princess Polyxena, who had betrayed his trust. The Greeks waste no time in preparing for their homeward journeys. 
NARRATOR 2: The women of Troy are brought before the Greek warriors. Their men killed, they are at the mercy of the victors and taken as slaves.
NARRATOR 1: They are loaded on the ships along with the gold from the royal treasury, jewels, silks, and furs. Anxious to get home after ten long years of battle, Agamemnon, Odysseus, Menelaus, Diomedes, and the others go their separate ways on separate ships.  
(Soldiers shake hands, slap each other on the back, and all exit—Odysseus and his crew return to the stage.) 
ODYSSEUS: It won’t be long until the shores of Ithaka are insight and our homes and families restored to us. 
SOLDIER 1: The entire wealth of the Trojan kingdom is onboard our ships. What a change it will bring to our people. 
NARRATOR 2: Having food for only several days, Odysseus and his men hug the coast in their three ships
ODYSSEUS: We are beginning to take water. We cannot sacrifice the essentials, but we must drop some of our load. 
SOLDIER 4: The Trojan gold weighs the most. 
SOLDIER 5: But it is most valuable! 
ODYSSEUS: I am afraid the gemstones must be thrown overboard.  
NARRATOR 1: Rubies, emeralds, sapphires, and moonstones are dumped over the side of the ship. 
NARRATOR 2: Rubies flash in the foam, sink in the waves, and flutter deep and catch the eyes of the naiads, the lovely sea nymphs, relaxing in the sea palace of their father, Poseidon.
NAIAD 1: Sea sisters, how beautiful! 
NAIAD 2: Look at the colors! 
NAIAD 3: Look how they catch the light! 
NAIAD 4: Sweet warriors, come beneath the waves and we will bring you great happiness. 
SOLDIER 1: Look! Beneath the waves!  
NAIAD 5: Join us, oh, men of war, and rest here in our palace deep. 
NARRATOR 1: Poseidon, the great god of the sea, is awakened by the tinkling laughter of his naiads. 
POSEIDON: Who dares to lure off my gentle nymphs? They are not for mortal men. 
(Naiads scatter.) 
NARRATOR 2: Poseidon calls to his son, King Aeolus, keeper of the winds. 
(Poseidon beckons to the distant horizon.) 
NARRATOR 1: Aeolus billows in on a great cloud. 
KING AEOLUS: Yes, father. What is it you desire from your loyal son? 
POSEIDON: These mortals, brazen, and bold, have greatly offended my kingdom. Send them a gale wind of such force that for many days they are delayed in their journey. 
NARRATOR 2: Aeolus sends a fierce blast.
ODYSSEUS: Our ship veers off course. Take down the sails. They are no match for this wind. We are being forced south. Oh, fair Penelope, will I never reach home?

The Odyssey (Scenes 5-6) begin at 3:01
SCENE 5:
NARRATOR 1: So after many days at sea, the stores of food are depleted, and the men begin to gaze longingly at the horizon, wondering how long before they starve. 
NARRATOR 2: And they begin to think of mutiny. 
SOLDIER 1: I say we take over this ship. Odysseus is mad. We have been waiting for our homecoming for years. We have no food, just chunks of old bread. 
SOLDIER 2: Odysseus has been a decent leader—he is determined to get home. I’ll stick by him. We’re all hungry—including him. 
SOLDIER 3: But how do we know he is taking us in the right direction? He could be leading us to some new and wretched adventure.  
SOLDIER 4: Look, there is an island on the horizon! 
NARRATOR 1: All rush to the ship’s edge, and indeed, they see an inhospitable land with very few trees and very big rocks. 
NARRATOR 2: So Odysseus and twelve men form a landing party to search for a source of food and water.
ODYSSEUS: Come on, men—I think I smell roast lamb. 
SOLDIER 5: It’s coming from the direction of those caves over there, sir. 
SOLDIER 1: I see some movement up there among the boulders. 
NARRATOR 1: The empty bellies of the men made them mad for nourishment, and the savory aroma led them to the mouth of a great cave. 
NARRATOR 2: Little did they know that the cave was home to one of the Cyclopes—a fierce race of man-eating giants that had at one time the highest honor of making thunderbolts for Zeus himself. 
POLYPHEMUS: I, Polyphemus, love stormy weather because it dashes ships upon the rocks. The sea throws up drowning sailors. Today’s choice morsels cannot resist a hot meal. My lambs on a spit will lure them to their deaths—and to my supper. (He hides inside the cave.) 
SOLDIER 1: Look sir, roast lamb. Hot. My mouth waters just thinking of it. 
SOLDIER 2: And look, great baskets of cheeses. 
SOLDIER 3: I must eat. I haven’t had food for three days. Let me by. (He rushes past them. They all run after him into the cave and up to the fire.) 
ODYSSEUS: Men, control yourselves. Remember the others. We must temper our cravings and— 
NARRATOR 1: But before he can finish his sentence, Polyphemus rolls a rock in front of the cave entrance and comes after them. 
NARRATOR 2: He picks up two men, bashes them together, and eats them ravenously. The other men cower in a corner, whimpering.  
SOLDIER 4: Can the gods be so cruel? We are doomed, oh . . .  
SOLDIER 5: Oh, why did I agree to come ashore? 
ODYSSEUS: Control yourselves. The only way to survive is by our wits and to come up with a plan. We must keep our heads! 
NARRATOR 1: So with the sounds of bone-crunching chews to inspire him, Odysseus tries to come up with a plan. 
ODYSSEUS: Oh, Great One, whom shall we thank for the kindness of your hospitality? 
POLYPHEMUS: I am Polyphemus, son of Poseidon, God of the Sea. 
ODYSSEUS: For so generous a host, may I present for your enjoyment a deliciously sweet wine—very like ambrosia to one’s palate.  
NARRATOR 2: Odysseus leaves a cask of wine near the fire and retreats back into the shadows. 
POLYPHEMUS: My little friend, it will please me to relax a while before I nourish myself with your bones. In return for your generosity, I will eat you last. What is your name? (He drinks from the cask.) 
ODYSSEUS: Nobody. I am Nobody. 
POLYPHEMUS: How right you are. Delicious wine, Nobody. You are a man with distinctive tastes. 
ODYSSEUS: If it pleases you, enjoy it in its entirety. Often the best drops are on the bottom, where you find the sediment of a thousand sweet grapes.
POLYPHEMUS: Mmmm! Good drink! I’ll stoke this fire so it will be well hot when I awake from a little rest. Then, I’ll roast you on a spit like a suckling pig. And now, a nap. 
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus, seeing his opportunity, hands a stick of firewood to one of the men and instructs him to make it into a weapon. 
NARRATOR 2: The others keep careful watch over the sleeping one-eyed giant. 
ODYSSEUS: Take this beam of olive wood and whittle away at the end. We need it good and sharp.  
SOLDIER 6: How is this? 
ODYSSEUS: Excellent. Now, let us put it in the fire and get it scorching hot. 
NARRATOR 1: The poker burns white in the fire as the one-eyed giant sleeps. 
NARRATOR 2: And when it reaches the maximum heat possible before it begins to burn itself, Odysseus takes it out of the flames, holds it over Polyphemus—and plunges the point into his one and only eye. 
POLYPHEMUS: Aaahh! Blinded—I’ve been blinded!  
NARRATOR 2: As he flails about in pain, he rolls the boulder aside from the cave entrance. And as his hands search frantically for the men who blinded him, he hears some neighboring Cyclopes passing by the mouth of his cave with their own herds. 
POLYPHEMUS: Help, help! I’ve been blinded! 
NARRATOR 2: And the frightened men, hoping to escape the dangerous situation, follow Odysseus’s orders and mix in with Polyphemus’s sheep to avoid his hands, searching frantically about the cave. 
CYCLOPES 1: What is it, Polyphemus? Why do you cry out? You disturb the sheep! 
CYCLOPES 2: You said blinded? Who has done this to you? 
POLYPHEMUS: Nobody, Nobody has hurt me. 
CYCLOPS 1: Then stop your howling and pray to your father, Poseidon, to deliver you from your pain. 
NARRATOR 1: Meanwhile, Odysseus and his men grasp the shaggy wool underbellies of the sheep and hold on with all their might.
NARRATOR 2: Thinking it would be easier to catch them in an empty cave, Polyphemus—still in agony—counts his sheep one by one then herds them out into the warm sunshine, unwittingly releasing his prisoners. 
ODYSSEUS (to his men): When we clear this bank of trees, run for your lives to the beach. 
POLYPHEMUS: Where are you, trickster—thief who has stolen my sight? Who has done this damage? 
ODYSSEUS: Run to the ship, everyone! Here I am, foolish one. You who dared to harm guests in your own home have paid the price. More than anything, hospitality is the keystone to a civilized society. May you be cursed!
NARRATOR 1: Polyphemus breaks off the top of a tall mountain and hurls it into the sea. 
NARRATOR 2: A tidal wave pitches the ships violently. 
ODYSSEUS: I, Odysseus, King of Ithaka, am your tormentor. Do not forget my name. 
POLYPHEMUS: Poseidon, great father of the deep,  hear your son. I raise my arms in supplication. Let not this man reach his homeland, but if it pleases the gods that he may, destroy his companions and let him come to a land that does not know him or want him.

SCENE 6:
NARRATOR 1: And Odysseus’s storytelling continues in the palace of King Alkinoos. Days pass, but the memory of the terrors of Polyphemus is still fresh in the minds of Odysseus and his men. 
NARRATOR 2: Fear has such a grip on their hearts that not even hunger can persuade them to stop at another island.
NARRATOR 1: On the third day of sailing north from the Island of the Cyclopes, the ship encounters a fortress made of bronze. 
NARRATOR 2: The walls of the fortress rise like curtains bolting up from the depths of the sea. Odysseus guides the ship through a narrow gateway and immediately thereupon the wind falls out of the sails and a strange calm falls over them. 
SOLDIER 1: Sir, an island. 
SOLDIER 2: And a golden palace! 
ODYSSEUS: Surely this must be the kingdom of an immortal. 
NARRATOR 1: The men disembark at a crystal pier and mount the marble steps that lead to a throne room. 
KING AEOLUS: You must be Odysseus son of Laertes, and wanderer of the seas. I have heard tell of your troubles on the breezes that blow through our fortress. 
ODYSSEUS: A humble suppliant I am and a guest at your mercy. To whom do I speak? 
KING AEOLUS: I am King Aeolus, beloved by the gods, and keeper of the winds. This is my queen. We have six daughters and six sons and each manages the weather for a month. They ride the winds around the world. I am the son of Poseidon and my father has ordered me, on many occasions, to whip up a storm to delay your journey. 
QUEEN CYANE: Odysseus, news of your adventures reached our ears ages ago. We know you are trying to get home. Perhaps the gods are on your side now and we can help you. 
ODYSSEUS: I hope you are right, great queen. With your help, the gods may grant my homecoming. 
KING AEOLUS: Stay with us for a time and renew your selves and I will confer on my guest a gift that will hasten your journey home. 
NARRATOR 2: And so Odysseus and the crew stay for a month at the palace of King Aeolus, keeper of the winds. 
NARRATOR 1: Each night Odysseus enchants his hosts with the tales of his adventures and struggles. Finally, the day comes when Odysseus can stay no longer.  
ODYSSEUS: Forgive me but my heart drives me forth, for my son grows older each day I am gone. 
KING AEOLUS: I am well aware of your situation. For your friendship and your stories and your courageous persistence, I grant you this gift. But mind you, if my directions are not followed precisely, I can assist you no further.
QUEEN CYANE: Odysseus, you must not let a soul open this gift. The contents are fierce and unruly. 
KING AEOLUS: Inside this leather sack I have placed the North Wind, the East Wind, and the South Wind. Open the sack only in an emergency. If they are released in error, I will assume the gods have gone against you and I can help you no further. 
QUEEN CYANE: The gentle West Wind will fill your sails and accompany you to your island home. 
KING AEOLUS: This silver string is all that binds these forces. Take care. 
ODYSSEUS: I will watch over it night and day and none shall be in charge of it, save I. QUEEN CYANE: Be on your way, good man. Your family awaits your return.  NARRATOR 2: Odysseus bows to the king and queen and exits with his crew.
NARRATOR 1: The ship sails on. For nine days and nights, they sail the sea, the boat blown freely by the West Wind. And Odysseus goes without sleep watching over the leather sack. But on the tenth day in the warm sun of an afternoon . . . 
SOLDIER 1: Odysseus, look! It is Ithaka! 
SOLDIER 2: I can see people tending their fires!  
ODYSSEUS: By mighty Zeus, I am a grateful man. 
NARRATOR 2: And with that, Odysseus sits on a coil of rope, closes his eyes, and falls asleep— so exhausted is he.
NARRATOR 1: The men looked at him asleep. They looked at the mysterious bag he held tight to his chest. 
SOLDIER 3: I am certain Odysseus is carrying gold and jewels in that bag. 
SOLDIER 4: That bag was given to him by King Aeolus. Why should Odysseus carry treasure on the day of his homecoming while we are empty-handed? 
SOLDIER 5: I say we break into it and take some for ourselves.
SOLDIER 1: A mere silver thread is all that stands between us and great wealth. 
SOLDIER 2: I’ll pull it open.  
NARRATOR 2: With a quick snap, the tie is broken and suddenly with great ferocity, the North, East, and South Winds whip out, knock the men to the ground, and shake Odysseus awake. 
ODYSSEUS: What has happened—who touched the bag? The winds—they howl in wild directions. We’re losing sight of Ithaka.  
NARRATOR 1: The mild West Wind is no match for the power of the others combined, and Odysseus and the crew are driven away, once again, from their goal. NARRATOR 2: Odysseus sinks to his knees in grief.

The Odyssey (Scenes 7-9) begin at 3:00
SCENE 7:
NARRATOR 1: After three days the ship takes refuge in a calm lagoon.  
NARRATOR 2: With fresh water and food uppermost in their minds, Odysseus sends out a search party. And much time passes before Eurylochus, in charge of the scouts, returns to the black ship, alone. 
ODYSSEUS: Eurylochus, you are alone. Where are the others? 
EURYLOCHUS: Sir, we came upon a palace in the forest. And in that palace sat a beautiful lady, maybe a goddess. She sat weaving and singing at a great loom and opened her doors to us in an invitation. 
ODYSSEUS: How were you treated? 
EURYLOCHUS: I was suspicious and stayed in her courtyard, but the others went in. I could see the men seated at a great banquet, and they laughed and ate and drank, but then they disappeared.
ODYSSEUS: My sword and my arrows may be of no use, but we must prepare for a fight. 
NARRATOR 1: And in that instant Hermes, the messenger of the gods, appeared. HERMES: You are right, Odysseus. Your might will be no use here. You have need of powers greater than you possess. Take this flower, the substance of which will protect you from her magical powers.  
ODYSSEUS: Of whom do you speak?
HERMES: You are on the island of the goddess Circe of the lovely hair, daughter of Helios and granddaughter of Ocean. Her charms are infinite, and mortal men have no defense against her. The juice of this flower will allow you to resist. 
ODYSSEUS: Hermes, the messenger of the gods, direct me so that I might save my men and reunite them with their families at Ithaka. 
NARRATOR 1: Hermes leans close to Odysseus and speaks of the plan in his ear. 
NARRATOR 2: Through willow glen and wild olive, Odysseus makes his way to the garden and palace of Circe. 
ODYSSEUS: Circe, daughter of Helios, I have come to retrieve the crew of my ship. 
NARRATOR 1: Circe, who has been weaving colorful images of naiads and dolphins and sea stars, rises from her loom and walks out into the twilight garden. 
CIRCE: Sea-stained warrior, what is it you wish of me? 
ODYSSEUS: I wish you to return my men so that we may continue our journey homeward. 
CIRCE: Wandering stranger, what you wish is impossible. Your companions have been transformed. 
NARRATOR 2: And with that, Circe gestures to an enclosure in the garden where a dozen swine look on helplessly. 
CIRCE: Your friends are being taken care of and have more nourishing food in their bellies than they will ever receive with you. 
ODYSSEUS: You’ve turned them into pigs and wish me to show gratitude? 
CIRCE: It would please me if you would relax and enjoy my company. Enter my palace and dine with me.
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus, ever mindful of the directions given to him by Hermes, follows Circe into her shining palace. 
CIRCE: Stranger, sit and I will pour you a beverage that will restore your strength and hope. 
NARRATOR 2: But to this beverage, Circe adds a magic potion and sets it down before him in a golden cup. 
CIRCE: Drink, great warrior.
NARRATOR 1: And Odysseus drinks from the goblet. When he is finished he looks her in the eyes. 
CIRCE: I touch you with my wand, yet you are unaffected by my magic. You must be Odysseus, son of Laertes and seed of Zeus. I have long awaited your arrival.  
NARRATOR 2: But Odysseus unsheathes his sword and holds it to her throat.  
ODYSSEUS: Lovely enchantress, swear to me that you will treat me honorably like all guests should be and that no harm or evil will come to me through your wiles. 
CIRCE: Resourceful Odysseus, teller of tales and warrior strong, to you only will I make such an oath. I swear no harm or evil will come to you. 
NARRATOR 1: And with her promise, Odysseus puts away his sword and returns to the table, his mind distracted and his mood full of darkness. 
CIRCE: Will you not eat? 
ODYSSEUS: How can I eat when my heart is heavy with the tragedy that has befallen my friends? 
CIRCE: If it will please you, I will return them to human form. 
NARRATOR 2: Circe the enchantress touches each pig with her wand and they are transformed. 
CIRCE: Notice, Odysseus, that your friends are younger and taller and more pleasing to behold than before. In good faith, I will help you. But stay awhile.  
NARRATOR 1: Odysseus is exceedingly fond of her and the tension in him is gone. 
ODYSSEUS: Goddess, bind our wounds and make us well again. Our spirits and bodies are broken. 
NARRATOR 2: And the seasons change and a year pass, and the hearts of the men turn once again, achingly, to their homeland.  
ODYSSEUS: Circe, well you have prepared us for our journey. But now, we must leave you. 
CIRCE: It is time. My magic will fill your sails and speed you on your way. Goodbye, great warrior. 
NARRATOR 1: They embrace one last time before Odysseus leads his men down to the beach and back on the black ship. 

SCENE 8: 
NARRATOR 2: When Dawn shows herself again with her rosy fingers, Odysseus and his men are well on a new leg of their journey, their sails full of Circe’s last gift. 
EURYLOCHUS: Odysseus, the men are restless and demand to know what direction we will take. 
SOLDIER 1: We sense something. 
ODYSSEUS: Once again, I must ask you to have complete faith in me. Do as I say, don’t ask questions, and we will survive another day. 
SOLDIER 2: We have learned our lesson. When our trust in you flagged, we released the power of the winds and lost sight of our homes. 
SOLDIER 3: Never again will we doubt you. 
ODYSSEUS: Circe, bright among goddesses, warned of the danger ahead. We must follow her instructions precisely. Melt down this wax and put it in your ears. Very soon we will see a sight too beautiful to behold and hear sweet music too lovely to bear.  And more danger lies beyond. 
SOLDIER 4: What about you, Odysseus? 
ODYSSEUS: You must tie me to the mast. Bind me hand and foot so that I am unable to unloosen myself.
SOLDIER 5: We will do as you say. 
ODYSSEUS: And whatever you do, do not under any circumstances free me. Do you understand? 
NARRATOR 1: So the men set about plugging their ears with wax and lashing their leader to the mast. 
NARRATOR 2: And soon after, the bright sun comes from behind a cloud, and illuminates a rolling meadow on a coastline in which sit five stately maidens combing their long shining tresses. Before them on the beach is a boneyard of unfortunate sailors. 
NARRATOR 1: The men, awestruck with the beauty before them, move to the edge of the ship and lean into the wind, hoping to pick up the fragrance of the enchantresses.
SIREN 1: Come, brave wayfarers. We are the Sirens, our song is so sweet, none can resist. 
SIREN 2: Our beauty surpasses any you have encountered. 
SIREN 3: Or ever will encounter in your lifetime. 
NARRATOR 2: And though the men can not hear them, they are indeed tempted. Odysseus stands firm against the mast but is visibly shaken. 
SIREN 4: Sing, sisters, your sweet song of sorrow and loss. 
SIREN 5: Take pity on these unlucky wayfarers and bring them comfort such as they might have in their own homes by their own hearths, and with their own families. 
NARRATOR 1: With these last words, Odysseus feels his heart sink, and he relaxes his shoulders to give in to their power, and the sirens begin to sing ancient notes unknown to mortal man. 
ODYSSEUS: The pain is all-consuming. Never before have I heard such lilting airs. Aaah! The beauty is too much to take. Eurylochus, unbind me so that my body might give up my spirit to reside here forever. 
NARRATOR 2: But Eurylochus and the others pay him no heed, for their ears are prevented from hearing the great wailing melody of longing and sacrifice. 
NARRATOR 1: Their oars dip furiously into the sea and they row for an eternity while Odysseus, lashes about, tied to the mast, awestruck with the dangerous beauty he experienced. 
EURYLOCHUS: We have escaped without a loss. Untie Odysseus, unplug your ears.  ODYSSEUS: We are at a safe distance, and once more we are spared. But I fear a most unfortunate challenge lies ahead. All oarsmen must determine to sail straight on between those two great rocks up ahead. Neither veer to the left nor to the right, but stay steady center. 
EURYLOCHUS: The rocky crags stick out of the water like pottery shards! We’ll never make it! 
NARRATOR 2: To the best of their abilities, the men obey. Leaning hard into the oars to steer the ship, the men look ahead to the churning choppy waves and the narrow passage through which they must navigate. 
SOLDIER 1: Steady your arms! 
ODYSSEUS: Charybdis, the fathomless whirlpool on one side, and Scylla, the monster of unimaginable horrors, on the other. 
SOLDIER 2: On your left—watch out! 
SOLDIER 3: We’re veering off course! Lean into the oars. 
SOLDIER 4: Steady! 
SOLDIER 5: To the right! To the right! 
NARRATOR 2: The waves churn and slap against the prow, and the whirlpool Charybdis threatens to suck them down. The oarsmen direct the ship closer to the dark-pegged, stoney chasm when . . . 
NARRATOR 1: Out of a deep black cave emerges Scylla, a monster of such horror that half the men drop their oars. But they are much too slow to escape from her six swift heads, each possessing three rows of razor-sharp teeth. Odysseus loses one man for each of her horrible heads. 
ODYSSEUS: Beware of the swell! Hang on! 
SOLDIER 1: A great hole in the sea is sucking us down!  
NARRATOR 2: And the ship is lost as the waves swallow up the last of the crew and the hard-got bounty of Troy. And then, silence . . . 
NARRATOR 1: Until finally a single man is spit up, and Odysseus is, yet again, washed ashore in a foreign land . . . and is, yet again, found by a lovely woman.
CALYPSO: I am Calypso. You must be Odysseus. You are weary. There is no need to go further. I will care for you.

SCENE 9:
NARRATOR 2: The leaders of Scheria look at Odysseus amazed. For never have they heard such tales of persistence.
NARRATOR 1: Taking advantage of a break in the story, two maidservants refresh Odysseus’s cup and lay before him sweet figs and almonds. 
KING ALKINOOS: How came you to our shores? Aurora is just now tinting the horizon for her master, the sun god Apollo. You can’t have had more obstacles to overcome.  
QUEEN ARETE: Surely your trials did not end there. Tell us about Calypso. Who was she and how did she treat you? (Odysseus takes a deep breath and shakes his head sadly.) 
ODYSSEUS: Beaten down I was. I had lost everything, and yet . . . Calypso is a nymph. Her home is the island of Ogygia where I washed up ten days after losing my companions. She was kindhearted and gentle and indeed restored me to health. The hurt in me lay deep, and she knew. She gave me time and care, and I recovered. 
QUEEN ARETE: And how did she help you heal such wounds? 
ODYSSEUS: Calypso with the lovely hair had a garden the measure of which would turn anyone’s pain to gladness. Deep in a wood with fragrant trees all around and birds of all kinds that nested peacefully there ... fountains with musical, trickling water,  grapevines bearing fruit, and a gentle meadow in a clearing. 
NAUSICAA: How lovely it must have been! 
KING ALKINOOS: It grieves me to think how many years lay between you and your family. 
QUEEN ARETE: How long were you on this island? 
ODYSSEUS: For seven years Calypso gave me all I could wish, save deliverance from this yearning for my homeland. The gods were merciful and put it to her that I should be on my way. And with her help, I constructed a sturdy raft. And with her blessing took to the wine-blue sea. After twenty sun-scorched days and brutal nights, my raft was lost to the swells and I washed up here, at the feet of your lovely daughter Nausicaa.
KING ALKINOOS: Odysseus, your story has touched me to my very soul. Depend upon me for safe passage to Ithaka. Let it be known that this, our kingdom, is the last stop on your journey. We feast tonight, for tomorrow we outfit a ship as able as any on the Aegean! 
QUEEN ARETE: You have your deliverance, Odysseus. 
NARRATOR 2: And Odysseus in his gratitude bows deeply to the King and Queen of Scheria.

The Odyssey (Scenes 10-14) begin at 6:36
The Homecoming 
(in which the family is reunited)
SCENE 10:
NARRATOR 1: And so with gentle winds to guide the ship and a strong crew to man her, Odysseus, before long, finds himself deposited on the shores of Ithaka. 
NARRATOR 2: Athena, his protector, appears to him on the beach and tells him the story of Penelope’s trials. 
ATHENA: Odysseus, you have returned at last to your kingdom. But hasten not to your palace and your wife, for though she awaits your return, heavy is her heart and deep are her sorrows. For many years suitors for her hand in marriage have camped out in your home. Great are their numbers, and they stand as the finest of youths. 
ODYSSEUS: And what of my son, Telemachus? 
ATHENA: Telemachus has been searching for you,  fearing the time draws near when his mother must take a new husband. 
ODYSSEUS: Penelope would never lose faith in my return. 
ATHENA: She has done all that is honorable and all that is wise. 
ODYSSEUS: How has she fared these many years? 
ATHENA: By her wits, she has survived. You chose a clever wife to match your clever self. But let us cease this talk as time is short. I will turn you into a  beggar so that none may know you. Telemachus is near, and I will bring him to you. 
NARRATOR 1: And with that, Athena changes Odysseus into an old and feeble man with gray hair and a tattered cloak.

SCENE 11:
NARRATOR 2: Odysseus obeys the goddess and begins the long walk to his palace. But walking is slow for him now that he is an old man, and people look at him with sympathy as he makes his way down the dirt road. 
NARRATOR 1: Suddenly, as he nears the marble columns of his porch, he is overcome with emotion and weeps into his hands. Nearby, a herdsman with an old dog sees the beggar and goes toward him. The dog breaks away from the herdsman and, wagging his tail, rushes up to Odysseus, who recognizes his favorite hunting dog, Argus.  
ODYSSEUS: What a fine dog you have there. Who is his master? 
HERDSMAN: Never have I seen him welcome a stranger in such a way. I am his master, but long ago, he had another. His master was the man of this great home. But he went off to war and hasn’t returned. It has been twenty years, but the lady of the house still waits for his homecoming. Sir, is there anything I can help you with? 
ODYSSEUS: I have traveled many miles and wish for some food to warm my belly and a place to rest my head. 
HERDSMAN: The lady Penelope would be vexed if you were turned away. Come with me and I will show you inside. There, many ungrateful men are living off the wealth of my absent king, and a grateful man would be a welcome change. Soon I must take in their food for the evening.  
NARRATOR 2: And the man takes the beggar up to the portico where Odysseus steps onto his own doorstep. 
NARRATOR 1: Inside they can hear the sounds of men arguing and laughing and demanding this or that from the servants. Odysseus cringes. 
ODYSSEUS: How long have these men been here? 
HERDSMAN: Four long years. Soon they will have eaten all the extra grain that was laid aside for hard times. Come inside and rest yourself. 
ODYSSEUS: This is the great hall where they camp out. What a mess they have made of it. 
SUITOR 1: What? A beggar? Don’t spoil our feasting with your presence. Ha! Ha! Ha!  
SUITOR 2: There are other homes to visit. Continue down the road. Ha! Ha! Ha! NARRATOR 2: From the shadows behind a column steps Penelope.
PENELOPE: Who speaks roughly to a guest in my house? No matter how long you have been here, we must treat each other with courtesy. 
SUITOR 3: Especially wanderers! Sometimes the gods and goddesses come down from Olympus disguised in this way. We must be watchful.
SUITOR 4: Nonsense. This tattered man is a simple beggar and doesn’t deserve our respect. 
PENELOPE: Perhaps you do not understand me, sir. He is a guest in my house and I will make sure he is treated well.  
NARRATOR 1: Just then, Telemachus, Penelope’s son, walks in.  
PENELOPE: Telemachus, you have returned! How long I have waited! Do you bring word of your father?  
NARRATOR 2: Two maidservants rush to help him remove his cloak and take a place at the table, while the suitors look at him with contempt. 
TELEMACHUS: Mother, let me rest awhile, and then we will talk and you will learn all that I have discovered.  
PENELOPE: Let me continue here with my weaving. 
SUITOR 5: So, Odysseus has not returned, and you have only words to give to your poor mother? 
TELEMACHUS: Let us eat, gentlemen.  
PENELOPE: And this wandering stranger also needs to eat. He will stay here tonight, for tomorrow I would like to hear the story of his wanderings. 
NARRATOR 1: With that, Odysseus begins to make the rounds at the great wooden table, sizing up the suitors all the while. He decides which ones are the strongest and which ones are the weakest.  
NARRATOR 2: When he comes to the place of his son, they look into each other’s eyes, and Odysseus knows that Athena has informed him of his real identity. 
SUITOR 1: Telemachus, your mother must choose among us. You have deceived us, fair lady, by your weaving, but the time to choose is at hand.  
PENELOPE: I set a challenge before you all. My husband Odysseus has a fine taut bow. If there is a man in this room that can string that bow, he will be lucky. But the luckiest man will be able to string Odysseus’s bow and shoot an arrow through these twelve axes handles leaning here against this wall, as Odysseus did when he would practice his marksmanship. The man who succeeds shall take me as a bride if that is what the gods wish.  
TELEMACHUS: My mother has spoken. Let it be as she has said. I ask you now to go to your own homes to sleep tonight and return here in the morning. 
NARRATOR 1: And the men slap one another on the back and file out of the palace.

SCENE 12:
NARRATOR 2: Late that evening, Odysseus prepares to bathe before bedtime. 
NARRATOR 1: An old nurse pours hot water into a tub for him.  
EURYKLEIA: I have been here at this palace for many years. I was in the room when Odysseus himself was born and received him in my arms before his own mother did.  
ODYSSEUS: Kind woman, you have been of great service to this household. 
EURYKLEIA: I even raised up young Telemachus. The misery I have seen in this home since the master left so many years ago for Troy to fight! All because of a woman named Helen! My lady’s heart is weary. 
ODYSSEUS: Tomorrow will be the end of her sorrows. 
NARRATOR 2: The old woman looks up from her work and notices a scar on Odysseus’ knee. She jumps back and looks into his eyes. 
EURYKLEIA: Only one person could have a scar like that. How did you get that scar? 
ODYSSEUS: A wild boar tore into my leg when I was young. 
EURYKLEIA: You were on a hunt with your father . . . Odysseus? Odysseus! Great Zeus, we have been delivered! 
NARRATOR 1: Eurykleia throws her arms around Odysseus and welcomes him home. 
ODYSSEUS: Come, dear lady, let me tell you how you can help us with our plan. (They exit.)


SCENE 13:
NARRATOR 2: Early the next morning, the palace is in a flurry. Penelope has arranged the challenge and sits down to watch the contest. Odysseus sits apart from the suitors but watches them carefully. 
NARRATOR 1: Telemachus shows the men where they are to position themselves while they wait their turn. And from behind a column, Athena watches and waits. TELEMACHUS: Eurykleia, take my mother and the maidservants to the inner chamber. This is not for gentle eyes to see. Now that the women are gone, you sir, step forward and try your might. 
SUITOR 1: Gladly. 
NARRATOR 2: He tries to string the bow but cannot. 
SUITOR 2: Because the gods look with favor upon the house of my father, perhaps I will have luck. 
SUITOR 3: You too have failed! Let us heat the bow and rub it with warm tallow. Perhaps it will bend easier.  
NARRATOR 1: He puts tallow on the bow but fails to bend it. 
SUITOR 4: I have long been a skilled bowman. Let me try. . . . I have failed! 
SUITOR 5: I am by far the strongest here. Give me the bow.  
TELEMACHUS: And you, too, the strongest of them all, have failed. It is only fitting that our guest make an attempt. 
NARRATOR 2: He takes the bow to Odysseus, who, still seated, strings the bow with ease and lets an arrow fly through all twelve ax handles. The suitors stand off in amazement. Odysseus, jumping up, has been transformed by Athena, to his once splendid self. 
ODYSSEUS: Here is a tale that has an ending writ by the gods! 
NARRATOR 1: And the narrow shafts sail through the air and strike down the unwelcome suitors. When Odysseus is finished, he steps back. 
ODYSSEUS: Telemachus, have the maidservants cleanse the great hall and send Eurykleia to me. We must prepare to speak to your mother.

SCENE 14: 
NARRATOR 2: Eurykleia comes before the man she raised as her own son. Odysseus takes her hand. 
ODYSSEUS: Kind nurse, the time has come to tell your lady the truth of what has happened here today.  Go to her in her chamber and tell her that her husband has come home.  
EURYKLEIA: I will do as you bid, with joy in my heart at your homecoming. NARRATOR 1: Odysseus and his son wait. And when Telemachus sees his mother enter the room, he knows to step back into the shadows while his parents talk. Penelope sits down and stares at Odysseus in silence for a long while. 
PENELOPE: My nurse tells me you claim you are my husband. What proof can you give? 
ODYSSEUS: Dear lady, surely, to look at me is all. 
PENELOPE: Perhaps after a rest, you will be more inclined to show us proof. Let me call my nurse.  She will prepare a bed for you outside this chamber. Indeed, it is the very bed that Odysseus himself built. 
ODYSSEUS: Your words cannot be true! It would be impossible to move the bed that I made. The bed that I built could only be moved by a god. No man could move it! It is carved from an ancient olive tree with roots deep in the earth. I built the room around it. There is an inlay of ivory and gold and silver.  
PENELOPE (rushing to him): It is true! Only Odysseus would know such things! How many years I have waited! 
(They embrace.) 
NARRATOR 2: And after a few minutes, Eurykleia and Telemachus step back into the room. 
NARRATOR 1: For they, too, wish to welcome him home.
 
THE END    




